Student Handbook 2020-2021
Preface
Dear students,
Welcome to academic year 2020-2021!
About the student handbook
Like every year, the student handbook is here to support you as a source of practical
details related to your programme of study. Whether this is your first year with us or
whether you are a seasoned student, you should be able to find the answers to many
of your study-related questions in this document. To help you find your way around
the handbook and our department, we have prepared 8 tips for a flawless time at the
Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering (DKE). In no particular order,
because they are all important in their own right:
• Electronic mail (“e-mail”) is an invention from the 1970s. Its popularity remains
high, especially among staff, meaning we will send important information to your
student inbox and expect you to read it. You should also keep a close eye on the
Student Portal and its announcements section.
• Thank us later, because this tip applies to everything under the sun: whenever you
sign up for something, train yourself to read the fine print. Our fine print can be
found in something called the ‘EER’ or ‘Education and Examination Regulations’,
which outlines the duties and framework for all of us at DKE. You can find the EER
in this handbook as well.
• Did you read the EER? Great! Here’s the kind of stuff you can find in there:
- Are you a new bachelor's student? As a bachelor’s student, you need at least 45
ECTS (‘credits’, out of a total of 60) in the first year in order to continue with the
progamme.
- Second year bachelor’s students need the full 60 ECTS from year 1 and at least 40
ECTS from year 2 to participate in the year 3 curriculum.
- First year master’s students need to fulfil 40 ECTS from year 1 to participate
in the year 2 curriculum.
• Ah, the perks of being a DKE student – a subsidized MSV Incognito membership, an
annual free barbecue, daily mathematics and the freedom (ok, obligation) to book
your own courses. Freedoming is difficult and that is why we allow you to forget
booking once, but only once, per year.
• The first rule of DKE is: you do not plagiarize. The second rule of DKE is: you do not
plagiarize. The third rule of DKE: if you do not know what we mean by plagiarism,
please have a look at article 5.15 of the EER.
• While at the coffee machine, try not to mistake a lecturer for a student (unless you
turn it into a polite comment about how young they look): memorizing staff’s faces
is already possible using the last pages of this handbook.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
04
• Speaking of coffee machines: we do have a code of conduct – to be found in this
handbook as well. If you are not the type to eat pizza with your feet on the table
during a lecture, common sense may already get you pretty far (again, this applies
to life in general and at DKE).
• Imagine: you are about to graduate… Or so you think, until you hear that you
accidentally booked courses that do not match the graduation requirements.
Please save us both from this terrible situation. Master’s students will want to read
subsection 1.2b to brush up on the possibilities and restrictions of course booking.
Wishing you a wonderful year,
Pietro Bonizzi Mark Winands
Director of Studies bachelor’s programme Director of Studies master’s programmes
Research at DKE spans the disciplines and interfaces
of artificial intelligence, data science, computer science
and applied mathematics.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
06
Contents
1 Education: The Profile of the Study of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence 09
1.1 What is the programme about? 09
1.2 Study System 10
1.3 Project Centred Learning 15
1.4 Internationalization 15
1.5 Degree 16
1.6 Study programme’s feasibility and Quality Assurance 16
2 Curriculum of the Bachelor’s programme and Master’s programmes 17
2.1 Curriculum of the First Year of the Bachelor’s Programme 17
2.2 Curriculum of the Second Year of the Bachelor’s Programme 31
2.3 Curriculum of the Third Year of the Bachelor’s Programme 44
2.4 Master’s Programmes Artificial Intelligence and 63
Data Science for Decision Making
2.5 Courses at other faculties or universities 95
2.6 DKE Honours Programme 95
2.7 Educational Minor Bachelor 96
3 Facilities for Students 97
3.1 Student Affairs Office 97
3.2 Administrative structure of the Faculty 97
3.3 Teaching Material 99
3.4 Participation in the Education 99
3.5 Announcements concerning Educational Matters 99
3.6 Change of Address Student 99
3.7 Computer Rooms and Project Rooms 99
3.8 Faculty Counsellors for Students 100
3.9 Student Services Centre (SSC) 100
4 Transnational University Limburg 105
5 Education and Examination Regulations 2020-2021 (EER) 105
5.1 Bachelor of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence 105
5.2 Master’s programmes Artificial Intelligence and 130
Data Science for Decision Making
5.3 Code of Conduct 154
6 Staff 156
Academic Calendar 2020-2021 158
Project-Centred Learning (PCL) is a teaching method used
in all of the Department of Data Science and Knowledge
Engineering’s programmes.
Maastricht
Amsterdam
Haarlem
‘s-Hertogenbosch
Arnhem
Utrecht
Middelburg
The Hague
Lelystad
Zwolle
Assen
Groningen
Leeuwarden
Belgium
Germany
Netherlands 3
Aachen
Brussels Cologne
Liége
Antwerp Düsseldorf
Maastricht
Paris
London Berlin Amsterdam
Rome
Brussels
Madrid
Student Handbook 2020-2021
08
Student Handbook 2020-2021
09
1 Education: The Profile of
 the Study of Data Science
and Artificial Intelligence
1.1 What is the programme about?
Knowledge is the central factor in modern society. Smart chips help companies to keep
track of goods and to manage supplies and stocks. The usability of new hightech
communication electronics, such as smartphones, navigation devices and digital cameras,
is greatly enhanced by intelligent software. Electronic banking and e-commerce heavily
rely on real-time access to large databases and require highly safe protocols for
information exchange. Medical and biological engineering helps medical doctors to
arrive quickly at an accurate diagnosis, and is now opening up exciting new possibilities
for personalized medicine. In the Data Science and Artificial Intelligence programme,
you learn how to approach new challenges in these important areas. You learn to collect
and organize valuable information, with the help of mathematics and modern computer
techniques. You learn to use models and computers to analyse the information and to
generate new knowledge, to draw important conclusions, to solve practical problems
efficiently, and to speed up the decision-making process.
The Data Science and Artificial Intelligence programme offers you a unique combination
of courses in applied mathematics, computer science and artificial intelligence.
From the computer science point of view, the emphasis is on software, programming,
algorithms and logic. Courses in applied mathematics are designed so that you quickly
become acquainted with the important concepts, methods and techniques - always
from a practical point of view, as proofs are never taught for mathematics sake only.
Artificial intelligence provides you with ways to reason with available knowledge, and
it introduces you into the world of machine learning and intelligent search. Did you
know that, nowadays, artificial intelligence is a standard component of commercial
computer games?
What makes the course programme stand out from traditional educational programmes
in computer science or mathematics, is the goal-oriented, practical and applied character.
Mathematical and computer models continuously serve this goal, by bridging the gap
between theory and practice. Classic optimization methods and modern intelligent
techniques allow you to arrive at efficient and sometimes surprisingly elegant solutions.
They help you to value the methods and techniques you encounter, and to gain insight
into their usefulness for dealing with practical problems.
This unique profile of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence is the key to a flexible
educational programme that prepares you for a successful professional career in modern
society. The wide range of application areas and the project-centred educational model,
offers you the opportunity to experience a diversity of topics from the ICT and
The bachelor programme will be renamed as “Data Science and Artificial Intelligence”
in 2020-2021.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
10
 telecommunications industry, medicine and biology, science, economics and business
management, just to name a few. Optional courses, your choice of topic for the bachelor’s
thesis, internships, and the possibility to study abroad, allow you to tune the contents
of your study to your personal interests.
1.2 Study System
1.2 A The bachelor’s programme curriculum
The bachelor’s programme in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence is a three-year
programme. We chose for a broad setup of the curriculum, so that students can decide
on the way they would like to specialize during the final stage.
Period 1 Period 2 Period 3 Period 4 Period 5 Period 6
Introduction to
Computer Science 1;
Discrete Mathematics;
Introduction to Data
Science and Artificial
Intelligence
Introduction
to Computer
Science 2;
Linear Algebra;
Computational
and Cognitive
Neuroscience

Data Structures
and Algorithms;
Calculus;
ICT and
Knowledge
Management
Logic;
Numerical
Mathematics;
Software
Engineering

PROJECT PROJECT
Year 1
Period 1 Period 2 Period 3 Period 4 Period 5 Period 6
Databases;
Probability
and
Statistics;
Graph Theory
Machine
Learning;
Linear
Programming;
Reasoning
Techniques

Theoretical
Computer Science;
Mathematical
Modelling;
Human Computer
Interaction
and Affective
Computing
Philosophy and
Artificial Intelligence;
Simulation and
Statistical Analysis;
1 out of the electives:
* Natural Language
Processing
* Introduction to
Image and Video
Processing
PROJECT PROJECT
Year 2
Period 1 Period 2 Period 3 Period 4 Period 5 Period 6
Semantic Web;
Game Theory;
Prolog;
Computer Security;
Robotics and
Embedded
Systems;
Digital Society
Large Scale IT and
Cloud Computing;
Logic for AI;
Parallel Programming;
Introduction to BioInformatics;
Software and Systems
Verification;
Quantum Computing
Data Analysis;
Operations
Research Case
Studies;
Intelligent
Systems
BACHELOR’S
THESIS
PROJECT BACHELOR’S THESIS
Year 3
Student Handbook 2020-2021
11
* Third year students choose 6 optional courses (3 per period) in addition to the semester
project in semester 1 of year 3. In case students have passed both electives of period 2.5,
either the course Natural Language Processing or Introduction to Image & Video
Processing can replace 1 of the third year electives. Student can also choose (1) elective
courses at other UM bachelor programmes of at most 18 ECTS (2) the minor
Entrepreneurship or (3) the educational minor. (4) In addition, students can study
abroad for a semester at one of our exchange partners (see Section 1.4). Please contact
the study advisor for more information. Also, check the Study Abroad section on
through the “My Organisations” section of the Student Portal.
Periods 1 and 2 last eight weeks in total. During week 1-7 there are classes and in week 8
exams. Periods 4 and 5 will last 9 weeks due to several holidays in this period. Three courses
are offered during each period, each course is good for 4 credits (ECTS). Per course, five to
seven hours of class are offered each week in year 1, and five hours in year 2 and 3. Note
that year 1 has an attendance requirement for resitting an Exam: check the Education and
Examination Regulations (EER) that are published in this study guide and through the
“My Organisations” section of the Student Portal for more information.
Next to these courses, you participate in a project of 6 credits that will last the whole
semester. Skill trainings and project meetings are mandatory: you are expected to be
present during 100% of the skill classes and 100% of the project meetings in each
academic year. If a student fails to do so, the project examiners may deviate from the
group grade for this individual student. The project of semester 1 runs during period
1, 2 and 3. The project of semester 2 runs during period 4, 5 and 6. For specific details on
the project curriculum in year 1 see section Project 1-1 and Project 1-2 with the course
descriptions of year 1.
Periods 3 and 6 will last three weeks, during which students work fulltime to finish their
project assignment. After the project weeks, it is possible to resit previous periods during
the fourth week. During both project periods, you will work full-time on a project
assignment. This project assignment is announced in the beginning of periods 1 or 4,
along with the group composition. At the end of week 7 of the 8-weeks periods, each
group separately gives a brief presentation for the teachers of the subjects concerned.
Each group shows their interpretation of the problem and will discuss their approach and
schedule for the further elaboration. The teachers give their reaction and judge whether
the subjects are sufficiently covered in the project. These interim presentations will be
assessed. The elaboration stage of the project weeks is concluded with the handing in of
the final report, handing in of the product, and giving an oral presentation of the project
results for all groups. The assessment of the report, the presentation, and the product in
principle result in the same mark for all the group members.
The final stage of your bachelor’s programme, period 5 and 6 of year 3 is reserved for
writing your bachelor’s thesis that equals 18 credits. Every student has to conduct a
short scientific research focussed on a relevant topic. This can be empirical or theoretical
research. Students have acquired information on these different research domains
throughout their educational programme. Each student has to hand in a signed
bachelor’s project plan to the Bachelor’s thesis coordinator. After approval, students are
placed in a group, based on their topics. A thesis supervisor with experience in the field
of choice is appointed to each student. In the second period of this semester, the
students conduct their own research. In the end of the last period of the semester, each
student has to present his or her results.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
12
DKE Honours Programme
The DKE Honours Programme consists KnowledgeEngineering@Work (KE@Work) and
(MaRBLe 2.0). Students admitted to the KE@Work path are placed at a company or
organization in the region through a careful selection and matching process. During
the full second and third year of the bachelor’s programme, they spend 50% of the time
in class and 50% at the company, where they work on solving academic challenges and
complex business problems, under supervision of dedicated business and DKE
supervisors. During MaRBLe 2.0 you will get the opportunity to work on a state-of-theart research project. Work will be organized in a similar way as in professional research
institutes where participants work together as individual experts on a team project.
Participation is open to excellent and motivated students.
1.2b The master’s programme curriculum
We offer two master’s programmes that are both two-year, programmes conducted
in English: Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Data Science for Decision Making (DSDM).
While the programmes have been designed with a September-start in mind, you can
start either in September or in February (please check the website for admission
deadlines). The tables below show the curriculum of AI and DSDM. When you enrol in
September, you will start in semester 1, and when you enrol in February, you will start
in semester 2. Mandatory (core) courses are underlined.
Semester 1 (September intake) Semester 2 (February intake)
Period 1 Period 2 Period 3 Period 4 Period 5 Period 6
Foundation of
Agents;
Intelligent Search
and Games
Multi-Agent
Systems;
Advanced
Concepts
in Machine
Learning
Autonomous
Robotic
Systems
1 of the
following:
Algorithms for
Big Data;
Dynamic Game
Theory;
Computational
Statistics
Advanced
Natural
Language
Processing
2 of the
following:
Information
Retrieval and
Text Mining;
Planning and
Scheduling;
Computer Vision;
Deep Learning
PROJECT PROJECT
Master’s AI Year 1
Year 2
Semester 3 Semester 4
Period 1, 2 and 3 Period 4, 5 and 6
Elective Semester:
Courses;
Research Project/Internship;
Business Internship; Study Abroad
THESIS
Student Handbook 2020-2021
13
Year 2
Semester 3 Semester 4
Period 1, 2 and 3 Period 4, 5 and 6
Elective Semester:
Courses;
Research Project/Internship;
Business Internship; Study Abroad
THESIS
Periods 1 and 2 will last eight weeks in total. During week 1-7 there are classes and in
week 8 exams. Periods 4 and 5 will last 9 weeks due to several holidays in this period.
Each course equals 6 credits (ECTS). Per course, five hours of class are offered per week,
in which a teacher will explain the theory of the subject or in which you have to do some
practical training.
Depending on the master´s programme you enrolled in, you are required to pass a
number of mandatory courses (5 for the AI master, and 4 for the DSDM master).
These courses are underlined in the tables above. Besides these courses, you can choose
particular electives to complete your first-year curriculum. The lectures of each course
will be scheduled, so that there will be no overlap between classes. The days that you
will have class will depend on your course selection.
Next to these courses, you participate in a project of 6 credits that will last the whole
semester. As a student, you are expected to participate actively in doing tasks with
respect to the project skills training and project meetings. In addition, students are
expected to cooperate actively with their group in order to successfully finish your
project assignment. If a student fails to do so, the project examiners may deviate from
the group grade for this individual student. The project of semester 1 runs during period
1, 2 and 3. The project of semester 2 runs during period 4, 5 and 6. Periods 3 and 6 will
Period 1 Period 2 Period 3 Period 4 Period 5 Period 6
Data Mining;
1 of the following:
Signal and Image
Processing;
Mathematical
optimization;
Stochastic
Decision-making
Model
Identification
and Data
Fitting:
1 of the
following:
Advanced
Concepts
in Machine
Learning;
Applications
of Image
and Video
Processing;
Information
Security*
Algorithms for
Big Data:
1 of the
following:
Dynamic Game
Theory;
Computational
Statistics
Building
and Mining
Knowledge
Graphs
Advanced
Natural
Language
Processing
Planning and
Scheduling
1 of the
following:
Symbolic
Computation
and Control;
Information
Retrieval and
Text Mining;
Computer Vision;
Deep Learning
Algorithms
for Data
Visualization
PROJECT PROJECT
Master Data Science for Decision Making Year 1
Student Handbook 2020-2021
14
last four weeks, during which students work fulltime to finish their project assignment
in the first 3 weeks and take possible re-examinations of the previous periods during
the fourth week. During both project periods, you will work full-time on a project
assignment. This project assignment will be announced in the beginning of periods 1
or 4, and the group composition and project topic assignment is based on student
preference in so far as possible. At the end of week 7 of the 8-weeks periods, each group
separately will give a short presentation. Each group will describe their project tasks and
discuss their approach and schedule for the further elaboration. The examiners will give
their reaction and judge whether the subjects are sufficiently covered in the project.
These interim presentations are assessed. The elaboration stage of the project weeks
will be concluded with the handing in of the final report, a dissemination website,
handing in of the product, and a public oral presentation of the project result for each
group. The assessment of the report, website, presentation and the product will - in
principle – result in the same mark for all the group members.
Choose your own curriculum
During the first semester of the second year of the master’s programme, you can choose
your own curriculum, enabling you to pursue your personal interests. During this
semester, you can obtain 30 ECTS by choosing elective courses of the other master’s
programmes offered at DKE (i.e., AI or DSDM). In addition, you can also:
• take a combination of elective courses at DKE and another faculty of Maastricht
University;
• participate in a research project of the academic staff or at a another university;
• participate in an internship at a company;
• follow an exchange programme at one of our partner universities abroad;
• participate in an honours programme offered by Maastricht University (extracurricular).
The final stage of your master’s programme, during the second semester of the second
year, is reserved for writing your master’s thesis that counts for 30 ECTS. The thesis is
produced individually and is the result of a master research project on a topic that you
will be working on under the supervision of one of the academic staff members. In the
first phase, the emphasis is on self-study, subject determination, approaching a
supervisor, planning and some preliminary research. After approval of the thesis research
plan by the Board of Examiners, the actual research is started in the second phase. In this
phase, the student carries out his/her own research. The senior researcher that acts as
the supervisor of this research process will guide the student using a series of frequent
appointments. The final phase is used to accomplish, i.e. write, the master’s thesis.
The master’s thesis project is completed by an individual presentation of the results.
Assessment will be based on the research, the thesis itself, the process, the software
and the presentation of this thesis (i.e., public defence).
Note that all individual curriculum choices are guided by our study advisor and academic
staff and will always be evaluated on quality by the Board of Examiners.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
15
1.3 Project Centred Learning
The programmes of the Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering are
designed around the Project-Centred Learning (PCL) teaching method. It resembles the
Problem Based Learning style, for which Maastricht is well known. The PCL educational
model is small-scale and student-oriented. You work in small groups on complex and
challenging projects that require you to develop a variety of skills. Companies and
institutes – who often submit projects - give our students the opportunity to gain
invaluable experience by applying their education to finding solutions to real-world
problems. Therefore, you immediately apply what you have learned from the course
material and lectures to real-life problems. Together with fellow students, you research
which information is required and how it is best presented. At the end of each project,
you deliver a functional computer programme and present your findings to your fellow
students, the teachers and/or the client.
Project-Centred Learning has the following advantages:
• from the beginning you find out what teamwork means
• you learn project-related skills in a natural way
• you will be continuously placed in an active role
• you will be able to match theory with its applications
• PCL increases the student’s motivation
Some examples of Master’s projects conducted at DKE:
• Finding “Banksy” through Image Processing
• Automatic Generation of Contextual Celtic Knotwork
• Modelling Human Decision Process from Intercranial EEG
• Relating component responses between rats and humans
• Kick-optimization for Robotic Soccer
1.4 Internationalization
The Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering has one of the highest
ratios of students from abroad. More than 70% of the scientific staff and 70% of the
students are non-Dutch, giving rise to an international study environment. Additionally,
DKE hosts a number of international exchange students each year and offers its students
a number of opportunities for international experiences themselves. For example, DKE
offers its students the opportunity to study abroad for a semester during the elective
semester. To this purpose, we collaborate with well-established universities such as:
European Economic Area (EEA)
University of Copenhagen
Reykjavik University
Sapienza Università di Roma
Université Toulouse Capitole o
Université du Luxembourg * o
Universität Konstanz o
Aarhus University x
Université Paris Dauphine * x
NON EEA
The University of Sydney
University of Technology Sydney
Université de Montréal *
Université de Genève *
City University of Hong Kong o
Singapore Management
University o
Student Handbook 2020-2021
16
* B2 level French required
x
 Only Master courses
o
 Only Bachelor courses
The above-mentioned exchange partners are an indication and subject to change due
to (temporary) agreements and exchange student balance. For an overview of the
available partners per semester, see the ‘exchange application’ web form.
Bachelor’s students can participate in an international study abroad programme at
a selection of these universities during the first semester of the third year of the
bachelor’s programme. Master’s students at a selection of these universities during
the first semester of the second year of the master’s programmes.
Please note that for students entering the Master programmes during the February
Intake, fewer universities will be available. Additional international collaboration is
done through the exchange of course coordinators with RWTH Aachen, with which
we closely collaborate and the fact that our two master´s programmes Artificial
Intelligence and Data Science for Decision Making are embedded in the School of
Information Technology (SIT) of the transnational University Limburg (tUL).
For more information, please contact the study advisor and read the Study Abroad
Guide available on through the “My Organisations” section of the Student Portal.
1.5 Degree
A successful conclusion of the bachelor’s programme will provide you with a
bachelor’s certificate according to Dutch law, that is, a ‘Bachelor of Science’.
A successful conclusion of a master’s programme will provide you with a master’s
certificate according to Dutch law, that is, a ‘Master of Science’.
1.6 Study programme’s feasibility and Quality Assurance
DKE strives for continuous improvement of the quality and feasibility of its study
programmes. Student evaluations of each course help us in maintaining a high
standard of educational quality and keeping the study programmes feasible. The
study programme’s feasibility means that a student with an appropriate background
should be able to finish the study within the set number of years.
To maintain this standard, the quality assurance officer collects information about
teaching, learning and assessment at the end of each period. The quality assurance
officer then reports the outcomes of the student evaluations to the DKE Education
Programme Committee (EPC), which also includes four student-representatives.
If the outcomes are unsatisfactory, the EPC will take action to improve the quality of
a specific course (or project) or of the study as a whole. Therefore, student responses
are essential in pointing out strong aspects and aspects for improvement of all
educational activities.
As a DKE student, you are encouraged to give your feedback on each course, as it may
give cause for adjustments of that course. Moreover, future students may benefit
from the results and comments of your evaluation just as you may benefit from
course evaluations of fellow students.
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
17
2 Curriculum of the
Bachelor’s programme and
Master’s programmes
2.1 Curriculum of the First Year of the Bachelor’s Programme
In order to learn how the processing and preparation of knowledge is performed with
the help of computer systems, a thorough basic knowledge of specific mathematics
and computer science subjects is required. This means that the first year is largely filled
with mathematics and computer science subjects. Apart from that, you will also get
introduction to Computational & Cognitive Neuroscience and ICT & Knowledge
Management. The year is divided into four periods of eight weeks with three courses each,
and two periods of four weeks during which you will work on a project. Each project is
preceded by partial project assignments during the other periods. The week schedule works
with two-hour clusters. In the overview below, the courses are indicated, as well as the
study load in credits (ECTS). One ECTS stands for about 28 hours of study time (lectures,
meetings and self-study). Besides the lectures that are given on the subjects, there will also
be practicals and skills training.
Year 1 ECTS
Period 1.1 Introduction to Data Science and Artificial Intelligence (KEN1110) 4
Introduction to Computer Science 1 (KEN1120) 4
Discrete Mathematics (KEN1130) 4
Project 1-1 (*) -
Period 1.2 Computational & Cognitive Neuroscience (KEN1210) 4
Introduction to Computer Science 2 (KEN1220) 4
Linear Algebra (KEN1410) 4
Project 1-1 (*) -
Period 1.3 Project 1-1 (KEN1300) 6
Period 1.4 Calculus (KEN1440) 4
Data Structures and Algorithms (KEN1420) 4
ICT & Knowledge Management (KEN1430) 4
Project 1-2 (*) -
Period 1.5 Numerical Mathematics (KEN1540) 4
Software Engineering (KEN1520) 4
Logic (KEN1530) 4
Project 1-2 (*) -
Period 1.6 Project 1-2 (KEN1600) 6
(*) Project 1-1 will start in period 1.1; Project 1-2 will start in period 1.4. The credits for the
projects will become available at the end of period 1.3 and period 1.6, respectively. Please see the
course description section Project 1-1 and Project 1-2 for more details on the project curriculum.
For each period, we will give a short explanation of the various parts. Before the start of each
period, the students will receive detailed information about the content, the study material,
the teaching form, the schedule, and the examination method.
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
18
Period 1.1
Introduction to Computer Science 1 (Code: KEN1120)
Examiner: Dr. G. Spanakis and Dr. E. Hortal Quesada
Desired Prior Knowledge: None. The course appears as desired prior knowledge for the
courses Introduction to Computer Science 2, Data Structures and Algorithms, Software
Engineering, Databases and Machine Learning.
Prerequisites: None. It appears as part of the pre-requisites of the second semester
project in year 1, both projects of year 2 and the third year courses Prolog, Parallel
Programming and Robotics.
Description: The course provides the basics of computer science and computer
programming. After a short introduction to computer organization, the principles of
programming are presented. The main topics of the course are: data types, variables,
methods, parameters, decision structures, iteration, arrays, recursion and a brief
introduction of objects. Programming skills will be acquired during practical sessions
using the object-oriented programming language Java.
Knowledge and understanding: The course offers preliminary methodological and
theoretical bases for studying and applying computers and computer programming on
which the rest of the curriculum builds.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Whenever a computer system or a
programming system has to be designed and implemented the knowledge and insights
acquired during the course can be used and applied.
Making judgements: After successful completion of the course, students will be able to
judge the quality and correctness of simple non-object-oriented programs.
Communication: The skills acquired during the course will enable student to
communicate about standard programming constructs and algorithmic basics.
Learning skills: After successful completion of the course students will be able to
formalize, analyse and program solutions to simple software problems.
Study material: Cay Horstmann (2012). Big Java Late Objects. John Wiley & Sons, New
York, ISBN 978-1-1180-8788-6 (Chapters 1 through 6 and 13). Lecture slides that are
made available after each lecture.
Exam: Closed-book written exam (80%) + Assignments (20%)
ECTS: 4
Discrete Mathematics (Code: KEN1130)
Examiner: Dr. S. Kelk and Dr. M. Musegaas
Tutor: Dr. J. Kuipers
Desired Prior Knowledge: None.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: In this course, we build a mathematical framework that is based on logic
and reason. The main objective of the course is to make students familiar with the
language of mathematics. Students will learn how to make sound arguments and to
detect where and why certain arguments go wrong. For this purpose, we will discuss
the basic principles of logic and, closely related, the basic types of mathematical
proofs. In doing so, we will encounter numbers such as integers, natural numbers and
real numbers and we shall examine what makes these numbers special. After that,
we will use basic logic to discuss, among other things, the following mathematical
concepts: infinity, sets, relations, functions, permutations and combinations. Our
fundamental tool in all of this is plain common sense. You really do not need your
toolbox of mathematical formulas learned in previous studies and neither do you need
a calculator. Pen and paper are the basic instruments needed. After completing each
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
19
topic, exercises will be provided to be completed in class or at home, since mathematics
is mainly learned by practising repeatedly.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to read, interpret and manipulate
basic mathematical terminology (propositional logic, quantifiers, set theory, relations,
functions, and combinatorics). Students will also be able to read and interpret several
different types of mathematical proofs and identify whether a purported proof is
mathematically sound.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Upon completion of the course students
will know how to read, interpret, write and manipulate rigorous mathematical
statements using propositional logic, quantifiers, set theory, relations, functions and
combinatorics. Students will be able to select, from a range of mathematical tools,
which is appropriate to prove or disprove a given mathematical statement, and apply
the chosen tools, rigorously and clearly in order to achieve the desired goal.
Making judgements: Students will be able to distinguish between mathematically sound
and unsound statements and defend the rigour of their own mathematical arguments.
Communication: Students will be able to write clear, rigorous and explicit
mathematical arguments using standardized mathematical terminology and such that
each step in the argument is a logical consequence of earlier steps.
Learning skills: By the end of the course, students will be able to autonomously and
critically reflect upon the mathematical correctness of their own arguments.
Study material: A. Chetwynd & P. Diggle: Discrete Mathematics. ButterworthHeinemann, Oxford, ISBN 0 340 61047 6. Lecture notes will also be provided.
Recommended literature: None
Exam: Written exam and optional weekly bonus exercises (the results of which are
added to your exam score, up to 10%).
ECTS: 4
Introduction to Data Science and Artificial Intelligence (Code: KEN1110)
Examiner: Dr. P. Bonizzi, Dr. R. Cavill and Dr. A. Wilbik
Desired Prior Knowledge: None.
The course appears as desired prior knowledge for the courses Reasoning Techniques
and Theoretical Computer Science.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: The course Introduction to Data Science and Artificial Intelligence offers a
comprehensive overview of the core topics in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence (DKE),
both from a mathematical and from a computational perspective. Particular emphasis
will be put on the basic classes of techniques and methods, the theoretical underpinnings
of data science and computational intelligence, and some example application domains
of data science. As such, the course will provide an overview of many topics that are
addressed in much more detail throughout the Bachelor’s programme.
Knowledge and understanding: The aim of this course is to make students recognise
what real world problems require the use of data science, and approach their solution
by using a data science process, namely: explore the data, model the data, and perform
simulations if required. Moreover, they will exhibit knowledge in the basic concepts of
artificial intelligence, such as agents, search, artificial intelligence, decision trees.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students learn to recognise applications
of data science and knowledge engineering in different domains and apply the basic
techniques they have learnt from both.
Making judgements: Upon completion of the course, students are able to recognise
the relevant domains of data science and artificial intelligence when confronted with
DKE-problems.
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
20
Communication: Students are able to explain the process they used to generate results
and communicate the meaning of those results in context.
Learning skills: Students have acquired the skills to recognise small-scale data science
problems and autonomously and critically reflect upon the appropriateness of the data
science process for tackling those, and propose a primary solution.
Study material: Material will be provided during the course.
Recommended literature:
• S. Russell and P. Norvig (2010): Artificial Intelligence, A Modern Approach. Third
edition, Pearson Education, ISBN 978-0-13-207148-2. Additionally, Handouts/readers
will be used.
• C.D. Manning, P. Raghavan and H. Schütze (2008) Introduction to Information
Retrieval. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521865719
Exam: There will be a closed book written exam at the end of the course.
ECTS: 4
Period 1.2
Introduction to Computer Science 2 (Code: KEN1220)
Examiner: Dr. E.N. Smirnov and Dr. A. Zarras
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Computer Science 1
Prerequisites: None.
Description: This course is a follow-up of the course Introduction to Computer
Science 1. It teaches object-oriented programming in Java. The main topics covered
in the course are objects and classes, interfaces and polymorphism, event handling,
inheritance, graphic user interfaces, exception handling, and streams.
Knowledge and understanding: After successful completion of the course, students
will be able to explain the methodological and theoretical principles of object-oriented
programming.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to implement basic
object-oriented computer programs. They will be able to design and describe simple
object-oriented computer systems.
Making judgements: Students will be able to judge the quality and correctness of
simple object-oriented programs.
Communication: Students will be able to communicate about object-oriented
programming constructs and algorithmic basics.
Learning skills: Students will be able to recognize their own lack of knowledge and
understanding and take appropriate action such as consulting additional material or
other sources of help.
Study material: Horstmann (2012). Big Java Late Objects. John Wiley & Sons, New York,
ISBN 978-1-1180-8788-6
Course notes, slides, and other information made available.
Recommended literature: C. Horstmann (2016). Java Concepts (8th Edition). John Wiley
& Sons, New York, ISBN: 978-1-1190-5645-4 C.
Exam: Written exam (80%) + practical assignments (20%).
ECTS: 4
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
21
Linear Algebra (Code: KEN1410)
Examiner: Dr. S. Chaplick and Dr. S. Mehrkanoon
Tutor(s): None.
Desired Prior Knowledge: None. The course itself occurs as part of the pre-requisites of
the second semester project in year 1, and as desired prior knowledge for the second
year courses, Mathematical Modeling, Linear Programming.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: This course introduces the fundamental concepts of linear algebra, and
examines them from both an algebraic and a geometric point of view. First, we address
what can be recognized without doubt as the most frequently occurring mathematical
problem in practical applications: how to solve a system of linear equations. Then
we discuss linear functions and mappings, which can be studied naturally from a
geometric point of view. Vectors spaces are then introduced as a common framework
that brings all themes together. Next, we shift from the geometric point of view
to the dynamic perspective, where the focus is on the effects of iterations (i.e., the
repeated application of a linear mapping). This involves a basic theory of eigenvalues
and eigenvectors, which have many applications in various branches of science as
for instance in problems involving dynamics and stability, in control theory, and in
optimization problems found in data science. Key concepts in the course are: vectors,
matrices, systems of linear equations, eigenvalues, eigenvectors, linear transformations,
and orthogonality. The software package Matlab is introduced in the accompanying
computer classes, where emphasis is put on the application of linear algebra to solve
real world problems.
Knowledge and understanding: Students are able to recognize and explain the
fundamental concepts of Linear Algebra: systems of linear equations, vectors and
vector spaces, basis and coordinates, matrices and matrix-vector computations,
linearity and orthogonality, linear independence, rank, fundamental spaces (row space,
column space, null space), determinants and invertibility, eigenvalues and eigenspaces,
diagonalization.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are able to analyse a linear algebra
problem from both an algebraic and a geometrical point of view. Students can solve
systems of linear equations, compute determinants and rank, compute eigenvalues and
eigenspaces, make use of complex numbers, diagonalize matrices, perform change of
coordinates.
Making judgements: Students are able to look at the same problem from different
angles and to switch their point of view (from geometric to algebraic and vice versa).
Communication: Students are able to motivate, both from an algebraic and a geometric
point of view: the solution set of a system of linear equations, the linear independence
and orthogonality of a set of vectors, the linear transformation between two
coordinate systems, the fundamental spaces associated with a matrix, the invertibility
of a matrix, and the diagonalization of a matrix in terms of the properties of its
eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Learning skills: Students have acquired the skills to autonomously recognize elements
of practical problems, which can be addressed and solved with linear algebra, and use
Matlab to solve larger scale problems.
Study material: David C. Lay, Linear algebra and its applications, 5th ed., Pearson, ISBN:
978-0-321-62335-5.
Recommended literature: None.
Exam: There will be a closed book written exam at the end of the course.
ECTS: 4
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
22
Computational and Cognitive Neurocience (Code: KEN1210)
Examiner: Dr. A. Roebroeck and Dr. M. Capalbo
Desired Prior Knowledge: None.
Prerequisites: none.
Description: The course Computational and Cognitive Neuroscience presents an
overview of the core topics in cognitive and biological psychology. These topics include
(human) perception, learning, memory, planning, problem solving,
reasoning, language, speech, and action. Both the functional and neuroanatomical
foundations of cognitive faculties are addressed. Several models of cognition and
theories of brain function that are of relevance to knowledge engineering will be
outlined. Several skills trainings will be given to train understanding in biological
functioning of neuronal communication, and functioning of neural networks and
genetic algorithms.
Knowledge and understanding:
The student can recount the main points of the domain of cognitive science
• The student can describe the main points of the domain of cognitive science
• The student can explain the following (human) behaviours while using these points:
perception, learning, memory, planning, problem solving, reasoning, language, speech,
and action.
• The student can identify the computational aspects and computational applications
of these fields
Applying knowledge and understanding:
• This knowledge is applied in in two practical assignments in which the students are
asked to create a genetic algorithm and a neural network
Making judgement:
• Upon completion of the course, students are able to interpret data and literature
about a subject in (or related to) the domain of cognitive and biological psychology.
• Using the data and literature, they can support judgements about the societal,
scientific or ethical aspects of the subject.
Communication:
• Students are able to communicate ideas and solutions to an audience of non-experts
and experts.
Learning skills:
• Students have acquired the skill to translate theoretical models into computational
models.
Study material: Material will be provided during the course.
Recommended literature: Sternberg, R.J. (1999). Cognitive psychology (latest edition).
Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace.
Kalat, J.W. (2007) 9th edition Biological psychology. Pacific Grove, California; London:
Brooks Cole. Gazzaniga, M. (2009). Cognitive Neuroscience (third edition).
Exam: Written exam
ECTS: 4
Period 1.3
PROJECT 1-1 (Code: KEN1300)
Examiner: Dr. Chaplick, Dr. E. Smirnov, Dr. S. Mehrkanoon, Dr. E. Hortal-Queasada,
Dr. M. Staudigl, and Dr. J. Niehues
Coordinator: Dr. K. Schüller
Tutors: Dr. K. Schüller, Dr. Popa, Dr. O. D’Huys
Description: Students work on a project assignment in small groups of about six
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
23
students. The group composition stays the same for the whole project and is announced
at the beginning of period 1.1. The students are guided through the project by a fixed
tutor. The project assignment is divided into three subtasks (one per period) and is
strongly related to the content of the courses from period 1.1 and 1.2. In period 1.1, after
receiving the assignment for the whole project at the end of week 5, the students work
full-time on the project in week 6. In this week, each group meets the tutor twice. In
period 1.2, the students continue working on the project, while also having to attend the
courses of that period. They meet their tutor approximately once a week. In period 1.3, the
students work three weeks full-time on the project and meet their tutor twice a week.
At the beginning of period 1.2 and 1.3, the students have to hand in a planning for the
current phase. At the end of each period, the students have to give a presentation and
the source code, presentation and an overview of who did what need to be uploaded to
Student Portal. While the presentations at the end of period 1.1 and 1.2 are in front of the
examiners and the tutors, the presentations at the end of period 1.3 will additionally be
in front of the fellow students. In period 1.3, they furthermore have to hand in a report
and attend a product and report examination.
Knowledge and understanding: Interpret constraint-satisfaction problems arising
in practice and translate this to discrete-mathematical algorithmic models capable
of solving the problem. Gain insight into practical use of basic software design and
development principles. Recognise and relate user-computer interactions to concepts
from graphics and user-interface frameworks. Strengthen knowledge of basic algorithms
and methods for efficiently solving constraint-satisfaction problems arising in applied
mathematics (especially: discrete mathematics) and artificial intelligence.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Design an answer strategy for scientific
questions using analytical thinking and logical reasoning. Translate discretemathematical algorithmic models to software code. Implement software to efficiently
solve constraint-satisfaction problems arising in applied mathematics (especially: discrete
mathematics) and artificial intelligence by finding, designing and applying appropriate
algorithms. Formulate computational experiments, and analyse and interpret the results.
Apply basic design and development principles in the construction of software systems.
Use existing software application frameworks for graphics and user interfaces. Use tools
for software project management such as version control systems and issue trackers.
Identify project goals, deliverables, and constraints. Plan and chair meetings. Create notes
for minutes. Work in a team such that the workload is balanced. Plan teamwork
by setting deadlines and distributing tasks.
Making judgements: Evaluate different mathematical and computational models with
respect to their suitability, efficiency and correctness for a specific task. Elicit and evaluate
relevant scientific background information.
Communication: Give a clear and well-constructed presentation, including a
demonstration of the product, and with appropriate use of illustrations and/or videos.
Offer and respond to questions on and constructive criticism of presentations. Write a
project report according to the structure of an academic article.
Submit arguments in exact sciences, with appropriate use of formulae and figures.
Cite published sources in the project report according to the academic guidelines.
Structurally inform stakeholders on project progress. Effectively communicate with
project group members about task division, planning and project deadlines. Effectively
communicate with group members by listening to others’ ideas; be contactable
include others in the discussion. Cooperate in a group to reach a consensus view. Give
constructive feedback to team members. Communicate in the English language.
Learning skills: Reflect on one’s own academic abilities and functioning in a team.
Study material: Project manual project 1-1, Maastricht University, DKE
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
24
Assessment: Final grade = 0.15 x grade of phase 1 + 0.15 x grade of phase 2 + 0.7 x grade
of phase 3, where grade of phase 3 = 40% grade for product + 40% grade for report +
10% grade presentation + 10% grade project management. Missing project meetings
and skill classes will cause an individual grade reduction of the final grade. Furthermore,
the examiners may deviate from the group grade for individual students if they either
contributed significantly more or less than other group members.
Skill classes:
Introduction into PCL (period 1.1)
The students learn how DKE applies the PCL approach. The structure of the periods
regarding the project is explained. Furthermore, the students will work on a small
assignment in groups and reflect on their group work.
Team Dynamics 1 (period 1.1)
This team dynamics workshop aims to provide you with a deeper awareness, insight and
practice in effective team collaboration & co-creation. During this introduction workshop,
you and your project team will draw up a team charter (contract) to initiate effective
group collaboration in project 1-1.
Minutes, agenda and planning (period 1.1)
In this skill class, you will learn how to create an agenda, chair a project meeting and to
take notes that can be understood by someone not attending the meeting. Furthermore,
you will learn how to create a proper planning for a project in form of a Gantt chart.
Elementary Writing and Presenting (period 1.2)
This skill class is divided into two parts: 1) Elementary Writing: Here, you learn how to
structure a report/article and what content to write in each of the sections of a report.
You learn how to use signal words, referral words and basics of how to write in the
mathematical language. 2) Presenting: In this part, you learn basic knowledge about
body language, group presentations and slide layout.
Citing and Referencing (period 1.2)
During this class, you will learn about when and how you should cite various (scientific)
sources in your project report
Team Dynamics 2 (period 1.2)
In this skill class, you are going to evaluate the team collaboration and communication
during project 1-1 by means of interactive exercises.
Presentation Skills (period 1.3)
In this skill class, you will present within your project group and receive individual
feedback on presentation style and content.
ECTS: 6
Period 1.4
Data Structures and Algorithms (Code: KEN1420)
Examiner: Dr. J. Niehues and T. Pepels, M.Sc.
Tutor(s): TBA.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Discrete Mathematics, Introduction to Computer Science 1
and 2. The course is desired prior knowledge for Theoretical Computer Science.
Prerequisites: None. The course itself occurs as part of the pre-requisites of both
projects of year 2 and the third year course Parallel Programming.
Description: As a continuation of the courses Computer Science 1 and 2, this course will
treat the systematic design and application of data structures and algorithms. Data
structures such as lists, trees, graphs, and strings, the associated algorithms and their
complexity will be treated. Design principles for algorithms such as recursion, divideand-conquer and dynamic programming will be treated as well.
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
25
Knowledge and understanding: Students are able to give examples of data structures
and explain do they support program design. Students are able to name what types
of standard data structures exist and illustrate their properties. Students are able to
describe some standard algorithms and highlight their properties. Students are able to
illustrate how to develop and analyse new algorithms.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are able to select the appropriate data
structure for a given problem
Students are able to propose an algorithm for solving a given problem.
Making judgements: Students are able to justify if and determine how data structures
should be applied. Furthermore, students are able to assess whether algorithms are
appropriate and efficient.
Communication: Students are able to explain how data structures and algorithms are to
be included in program designs.
Learning skills: Students are able to reflect on which data structures and/or algorithms
are applicable for each problem.
Study material: Goodrich & Tamassia (2014). Algorithm Design and Applications.
Wiley, ISBN 978-1118335918.
Exam: ‘Closed Book’ written exam, during the course the students will receive a number
of assignments, which can earn them up to a total of one bonus point.
ECTS: 4
Calculus (Code: KEN1440)
Examiner: Dr. A. Briassouli and Dr. O. D’Huys.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: The following subjects will be discussed in Calculus: limits and continuity,
differential calculus, inverse and transcendental functions, mean value theorem, integral
calculus, sequences and series, introduction to differential equations, introduction to
multivariable calculus. In addition to the main facts and concepts, problem-solving
strategies will be discussed. Both the intuition behind the concepts and their rigorous
definitions will be presented along with simple examples of formal mathematical proofs.
Knowledge and understanding: Student can define, write and explain key facts and
concepts involving limits and continuity, can interpret and solve differential calculus,
inverse and transcendental functions, mean value theorem, integral calculus, sequences
and series, first-order linear differential equations, basics of multivariable calculus.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are able to provide examples of
instances of problems of specific properties. Students are able to solve problems
involving concepts learned in the course, using standard problem-solving strategies.
Students are able to understand simple mathematical proofs.
Making judgements: Students are able to analyse a simple problem within the course
content and justify the solution methodology they choose. They can summarize this
methodology mathematically.
Communication: Students are able to explain their solution strategy in written form and
defend their solution strategy in discussion with others
Learning skills: After successful completion of the course the students will be able
both to solve standard problems (constructing graphs of functions, finding extrema of
functions, computing limits, summing infinite series etc.) and to apply their knowledge in
solving and analysing more complex problems (e.g. in analysis of numerical algorithms).
Study material: Calculus, a complete course, any edition, by R.A. Adams, Addison Wesley
Longman and materials provided during the lecture.
Exam: Midterm and final written exams.
ECTS: 4
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
26
ICT and Knowledge Management (Code: KEN1430)
Examiner: Dr. ir. P. Bollen (SBE)
Tutor: Dr. ir. P. Bollen (SBE)
Description: Knowledge is a fundamental prerequisite in the ability of a person to
execute a task. This ability consists of explicit knowledge or information, implicit
knowledge or experiences, skills and attitudes.
In this course, we will focus on the (fact-based) conceptual modelling approach in which
we also clearly make a link to a relevant contemporary domain in computer science:
block chain. We will use the following definition of Knowledge Management:
Knowledge management is an integral approach for the identification, the structuring,
the sharing and evaluation of knowledge in the organization.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to explain fundamental building
blocks of a domain knowledge model. Students can describe the development of the
semantic-conceptual modelling approach to knowledge management from the 1970s
until now. Students can describe and outline the semantic-conceptual knowledge
modelling process
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to apply the steps in the
semantic-conceptual knowledge modelling process on scaled-down examples. Students
will be able to apply all steps in the semantic-conceptual knowledge modelling process
on ‘real-life’ modelling domains.
Making judgement: Students will be able to assess a knowledge domain and determine
whether semantic-conceptual modelling can be applied and what domain knowledge
and domain examples will be needed to derive the fact types and integrity rules
Communication: Students will be able to write a professional report in which
they communicate their findings to a domain problem that they have solved by
understanding, assessing and applying the semantic conceptual modelling knowledge
they have acquired in (the first part of) this course.
Learning skills: Students will be able to apply a professional way of working according to
a well-documented methodology
Study material: E-reader
Exam: hand-in exercises, mid-term open book exam, final group project
ECTS: 4
Period 1.5
Logic (Code KEN1530)
Examiner: Dr. ir. N. Roos and Dr. O. D’Huys
Prerequisites: None. The course appears as a prerequisite for the course Logic for AI.
Description: This course deals with three logical systems, namely propositional logic,
first-order predicate logic and epistemic logic. The course covers notation systems, syntax
and semantics, valid consequences, deduction, semantic tableaux, and proof systems.
Knowledge and understanding: Students need to get accustomed to the fundamental
concepts of mathematical logical systems (propositional logic and predicate logic) to
able to describe information in a logical framework and to reason and prove correctly.
Students will get accustomed to the basic concepts of some advanced logical systems
(epistemic logic and dynamic logic).
Applying knowledge and understanding: Student will apply the reasoning and proof
methods learned to small-scale problems and some more complex situations.
Making judgements: Students will learn to judge how to reason correctly using
mathematical proofs and how to judge which logical system is suitable to solve the
problem at hand.
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
27
Communication: The chosen syntax of the logical language used must be easily
understandable by peers and others experts the logical proofs given must be correct,
concise and easily understandable
Learning skills: having learned basic logical concepts and reasoning techniques the
students are able to apply them to larger-scale problems
Study material:
• Johan van Benthem, Hans van Ditmarsch, Jan van Eijck, Jan Jaspars, Logic in Action.
Edition of February 2014 or later. This is a freely available e-book. Check your Student
Portal for the link.
Exam: Written exam; during the course the students will receive three assignments,
that, if they receive a sufficient grade, may earn them up to a total of one bonus point.
ECTS: 4
Numerical Mathematics (Code: KEN1540)
Examiner: Dr. P. Collins and Dr. K. Stankova.
Tutor(s): Dr. P. Collins.
Desired Prior Knowledge: calculus, linear algebra
Description: Numerical mathematics is the art of solving mathematical problems with
the aid of a digital computer. In this course, we will cover the fundamental concepts of
numerical mathematics, including the floating-point representation of real numbers,
truncation and round off errors, iterative methods and convergence. We will study the
simplest and most important algorithms for core problems of numerical mathematics,
namely the solution of algebraic equations, interpolating data by polynomials and
splines, numerically estimating derivatives and integrals, solving differential equations,
approximating functions by polynomials and Fourier series, solving systems of linear
algebraic equations and computing eigenvalues. There will be a strong practical
component, with students being expected to write their own numerical code and test
the performance and suitability of different methods on various problems.
Knowledge and understanding: By the end of this course, students will have knowledge
of the fundamental problems of numerical mathematics and basic techniques for their
solution. You will understand issues of efficiency and numerical accuracy, will be able
to analyse which numerical methods are likely to perform best on different types of
problem, and evaluate whether the results of a given computation are trustworthy.
You will be able to write your own code (in MATLAB) implementing basic numerical
algorithms. Advanced students will have the skills necessary to adapt existing
numerical algorithms and develop new algorithms.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be expected to implement
the algorithms covered in the lectures, and apply these to practical problems.
Making judgements: Students will learn how to analyse which numerical methods
are likely to perform best on different types of problem, and to evaluate whether the
results of a given computation are trustworthy.
Communication: Students will learn the terminology required to discuss numerical
algorithms and the results of numerical computations with mathematicians, (social)
scientists and engineers.
Learning skills: Students will learn to design, analyse, implement and apply numerical
methods.
Study material: Slides, exercise sheets.
Recommended literature: Faires & Burden, “Numerical Methods”.
Exam: Written examination with formula sheet (80%). Computer-based homework
exercises (20%+10% Bonus).
ECTS: 4
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
28
Software Engineering (Code: KEN1520)
Examiner: Dr. C. Seiler, T. Pepels, M.Sc.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Computer Science 1 and 2, Data Structures
and Algorithms.
Prerequisites: None
Description: This course introduces students to software design and project
management concepts. Students are introduced to multiple techniques they require
to work on medium and large-scale projects in professional business and research
environments. Students learn how to produce professional, reliable, and cost-efficient
software that can be developed in a team, reused, maintained, further evolved, and
that is tested professionally. Covered concepts include requirement engineering,
project planning, risk management, software evaluation and testing, software
engineering processes, design principles, software architectures, design patterns, code
review, version control, specifications, debugging, and abstract data types.
Knowledge and understanding: Students learn how to efficiently design and write
professional software that meets specifications made by themselves or by customers.
Students learn what the essential elements of the software engineering process are.
These elements include requirement analysis, design methodologies, implementation
strategies, and validation techniques.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students acquire the skills
• to critically analyse software requirements, software designs, software
implementations, and software evaluations.
• to efficiently plan, execute, and monitor progress in-group projects.
• to cooperate better in a group and to participate more effectively as a professional in
academia or business environment.
Software engineering is a core activity of knowledge engineers and data scientists. In
their professional career DKE students often will act as active programmers, software
designers, and project managers where they need to create software as part of a team
or act as team leader. The project management skills and tools being taught in this
course that help students creating professional and cost-effective software are thus
crucial for their career and lay the foundation for further studies of in this field. The
knowledge obtained will directly help students for the subsequent semester projects
and Bachelor thesis.
Making judgements: Students learn to judge the viability of selected software
development methodologies and new developments in design concepts during their
career. Students learn to compare design choices and judge their consequences.
Communication: Students learn to discuss and document software developments
professionally. Knowledge about widely spread standard software development
techniques and about standard design patterns are essential for efficient
communication between software developers. Standards in software engineering
facilitate cost-effective communication and help to avoid misunderstandings between
customers and suppliers, between team leaders and team members as well as between
team members.
Learning skills: Students learn to successfully reflect on their project management
skills, on how they contribute to a software project as part of a team, and on how
to adjust their software engineering approaches to different professional scenarios.
Students learn to reflect on and to verify own and others software designs and
implementations in a professional manner.
Study material: Lecture material provided during the lecture.
Recommended literature:
• Goldman and Miller, MIT 6.031: Software Construction: http://web.mit.edu/6.031/
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
29
• Gamma et al., Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software (1994)
Exam: Written “closed-book” exam at the end of the course. During the course,
students receive several graded assignments that can earn them a maximum bonus
grade of 1.0.
ECTS: 4
Period 1.6
Project 1-2 (Code: KEN1600)
Examiners: Dr. P. Collins, Dr. ir. N. Roos, Dr. C. Seiler and Dr. Stankova
Coordinator: Dr. K. Schüller
Tutors: Dr. K. Schüller and Dr. O. D’Huys
Prerequisites: In order to participate in this project the student has to have passed
two out of four courses from the set: Discrete Mathematics, Linear Algebra, Computer
Science I and Computer Science II.
Description: Students work on a project assignment in small groups of about six
students. The group composition is announced at the beginning of period 1.4 and
remains the same for the whole project.. The students are guided through the project
by a fixed tutor. The project assignment is divided into three subtasks (one per period)
and is strongly related to the content of the courses from period 1.4 and 1.5. In period
1.4, after receiving the assignment for the whole project at the end of week 5, the
students work full-time on the project in week 6. In this week, each group meets the
tutor twice. In period 1.5, the students continue working on the project, while also
having to attend the courses of that period. They meet their tutor approximately once
a week. In period 1.6, the students work three weeks full-time on the project and meet
their tutor twice a week.
At the beginning of period 1.5 and 1.6, the students have to hand in a planning for
the current phase. At the end of each period, the students give a presentation and
the source code, presentation and an overview of who did what need to be uploaded
to Student Portal. While the presentations at the end of period 1.4 and 1.5 are in
front of the examiners and the tutors, the presentations at the end of period 1.6 will
additionally be in front of the fellow students. In period 1.6, they furthermore have to
hand in a report and attend a product and report examination.
Knowledge and understanding: Interpret the meaning of mathematical models
of real-world processes. Gain insight into practical use of software design and
development principles. Recognise and relate user-computer interactions to concepts
from graphics and user-interface frameworks.
Strengthen knowledge of basic algorithms and methods for specific problems in
artificial intelligence and applied mathematics.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to design an answer
strategy for scientific questions using analytical thinking and logical reasoning and to
translate mathematical models to software code.
Furthermore, students will be able to implement software to solve problems in applied
mathematics by applying numerical methods and artificial intelligence algorithms,
formulate computational experiments, and analyse and interpret the results, apply
design and development principles in the construction of software systems and use
existing software application frameworks for graphics and user interfaces.
Even more so, students will learn to use tools for software project management such
as version control systems and issue trackers, identify project goals, deliverables,
and constraints. Lastly they will learn how to plan and chair meetings, create notes
for minutes, work in a team such that the workload is balanced and plan teamwork by
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
30
setting deadlines and distributing tasks.
Making judgements: Students will learn to evaluate different mathematical and
computational models with respect to their suitability, efficiency and correctness for
a specific task.
Communication: Students will be able to give a clear and well-constructed
presentation, including a demonstration of the product, and with appropriate use
of illustrations and/or videos, to offer and respond to questions on and constructive
criticism of presentations. Furthermore, they will learn to write a project report
according to the structure of an academic article, submit arguments in exact sciences,
with appropriate use of formulae and figures. They learn to cite published sources
in the project report according to the academic guidelines. Additionally, students
will learn to structurally inform stakeholders on project progress and effectively
communicate with project group members about task division, planning and project
deadlines, effectively communicate with group members by listening to others’ ideas;
be contactable include others in the discussion. It will be important to cooperate in
a group to reach a consensus view, communicate in the English language, elicit and
evaluate relevant scientific background information.
Learning skills: Reflect on one’s own academic abilities and functioning in a team.
Study material: Project manual project 1-2, Maastricht University, DKE.
Assessment: Final grade = 0.15 x grade of phase 1 + 0.15 x grade of phase 2 + 0.7 x
grade of phase 3, where grade of phase 3 = 40% grade for product + 40% grade for
report + 10% grade presentation + 10% grade project management. Missing project
meetings and skill classes will cause an individual grade reduction of the final grade.
Furthermore, the examiners may deviate from the group grade for individual students
if they either contributed significantly more or less than other group members.
Skill classes:
Team Dynamics 3 (period 1.4)
This team dynamics workshop aims to provide you with a deeper awareness, insight
and practice in effective team collaboration & co-creation. During this introduction
workshop, you and your project team will draw up a team charter (contract) to
initiate effective group collaboration in project 1-2.
Referencing Tools (period 1.4)
During this class, you will learn how to 1) use referencing tool EndNote, 2) to collect
and keep track of your references, and 3) to easily and correctly insert them into your
project report documents as in-text citations, footnotes or a bibliography in any of a
large number of citation styles.
Academic Writing (period 1.5)
In the project skills meetings you will explore the key structure of your report, as well
as key points of Academic Writing at Maastricht University. Areas of focus include
structure of paper, linguistic aspects of writing in English, presenting information
logically and citation and reference procedures.
Advanced Presenting (period 1.5)
This second period will focus on presentation skills and techniques. This introduction
helps with public speaking and prepares you for project report presentations.
Areas of focus include structure of a presentation, public speaking techniques and
enunciating, language aspects to remember while planning a presentation, and the
dos and don’ts expected by Maastricht University.
Team Dynamics 4 (period 1.5)
In this skill class, you are going to evaluate the team collaboration and
communication during project 1-2 by means of interactive exercises.
ECTS: 6
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
31
2.2 Curriculum of 2nd Year of the Bachelor’s Programme
Year 2 ECTS
Period 1.1 Databases (KEN2110) 4
Probability and Statistics (KEN2130) 4
Graph Theory (KEN2220) 4
Project 2-1 (*) -
Period 2.2 Reasoning Techniques (KEN2230) 4
Machine Learning (KEN2240) 4
Linear Programming (KEN2520) 4
Project 2-1 (*) -
Period 2.3 Project 2-1 (KEN2300) 6
Period 2.4 Mathematical Modelling (KEN2430) 4
Human Computer Interaction and Affective Computing (KEN2410) 4
Theoretical Computer Science (KEN2420) 4
Project 2-2 (*) -
Period 2.5 Philosophy & Artificial Intelligence (KEN2120) 4
Simulation and Statistical Analysis (KEN2530) 4
Natural Language Processing (KEN2570) (Elective**) 4
Introduction to Image and Video Processing (KEN3238)(Elective**) 4
Project 2-2 (*) -
Period 2.6 Project 2-2 (KEN2600) 6
(*) Project 2-1 will start in period 2.1 with weekly meetings; Project 2-2 will start in
period 2.4 with weekly meetings. The credits for the projects will become available at
the end of period 2.3 and 2.6 respectively.
** Electives: In case students have passed both electives of period 2.5, either the course
Natural Language Processing or Introduction to Image and Video Processing can replace
1 of the third year electives
For each period, we will give a short explanation of the various parts. Before the start
of each period, the students will receive detailed information about the content, the
study material, the teaching form, the schedule, and the examination method.
Period 2.1
Databases (Code: KEN2110)
Examiner: Dr. D. Rafailidis
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Computer Science 1 and 2.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: This course will cover data modelling, the concepts and theory of the
relational data model, and the widely used programming language SQL. These
concepts will be applied in case studies.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to describe the basic concepts
of databases, explain the fundamental concepts of database management systems,
and query languages.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to explain the
proper database design based on the users’ requirements, indicate possibilities and
limitations of each database type. In addition, students will be able to combine
fundamental Computer Science architectures and cooperate in a group to design and
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
32
construct a database.
Making judgements: Student will be able to analyse and justify a practical database
problem, examine different design models, and refine database models based on reallife use cases.
Communication: Students will be able to summarize the basic entities and
relationships involved in the database design, and communicate with the end users to
fetch the database requirements
Learning skills: Students will be able to reflect on certain solutions of the databases
design and implementation, assess the correctness of the database models and identify
follow-up literature, beyond the teaching material of the course.
Study material: Elmasri, R. and Navathe, S.B. Fundamentals of Database Systems. 5th
(2007) or 6th (2010) edition. Pearson International Edition; or Elmasri, R. and Navathe,
S.B. Database Systems: models, languages, design, and application programming. 6th
(2007) edition. Pearson Global Edition.
Recommended literature: Ramakrishnan, R. and Gehrke, G. 2002. Database
Management Systems (3 ed.). McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, NY, USA.
Exam: Written exam (75%) + practical assignment (25%)
ECTS: 4
Probability & Statistics (Code: KEN2130)
Examiner: Dr. C. Seiler
Desired Prior Knowledge: Discrete Mathematics and Calculus
Prerequisites: None.
Description: Probability theory is the mathematical branch that focuses on
experiments whose outcomes are determined by chance. Statistics is about collecting
and analyzing numerical data in order to infer properties of the whole population.
In this course, we will discuss the following topics:
• Probabilities, conditional probabilities, random variables, discrete and continuous
probability distributions, joint probability distributions.
• Expectation, variance, standard deviation, covariance and independence.
• Several discrete and continuous probability distributions.
• Random samples, unbiased estimators, the central limit theorem
• Verification of hypotheses and confidence intervals
Knowledge and understanding: In this course, the students obtain tools to define
random variables and identify probability distributions in a wide range of probabilistic
experiments. Furthermore, they know which procedure is most appropriate to find an
answer to a given statistical question.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are capable of calculating
probabilities, expectations, variances and related quantities in a wide range of
probabilistic experiments. Furthermore, they can estimate statistical quantities and
perform statistical tests to extract information from data sets.
Making judgements: Students are able to critically analyse probabilistic experiments
and statistical inferences and are able to decide whether to accept or reject statistical
hypotheses.
Communication: The students will be able to communicate their conclusions and the
underlying rationale to expert and non-expert audiences.
Learning skills: Students are able to use elements from probability theory and statistics
in other domains in order to increase one’s knowledge.
Study material: Hwang and Blitzstein, Introduction to Probability (2019, second edition)
Exam: Written exam
ECTS: 4
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
33
Graph Theory (Code: KEN2220)
Examiner: Dr. M. Mihalák
Desired Prior Knowledge: Discrete Mathematics; Data Structures and Algorithms
Prerequisites: None
Description: A graph is simply a collection of points, some of which are joined by lines.
This deceptively simple structure is one of the cornerstones of both theoretical and
applied computer science. A great many problems that arise in the real world can be
modeled as graph problems. Several classical examples include the problem of finding
the shortest route between two cities, of maximizing flow in a network of pipelines,
or of finding an optimal pairing between producers and consumers. In this course we
will look at both the algorithmic/applied side of graph theory and its more abstract
mathematical foundations, because the latter is often important for understanding the
former. We will cover topics such as paths, tours, trees, matchings, flows and colorings.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will have a solid overview of the basic
concepts and results of (applied) graph theory, including the main mathematical tools
to argue about graphs. Students will have the tools to model and analyze various realworld problems using graphs.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to recognize when
a problem can be modeled with graphs, and whether the problem can be efficiently
solved using standard or slightly adjusted graph-theoretic algorithms.
Making judgements: Students will be able to formulate a given (sub)problem as a
graph-theoretic problem, argue why the formulation is correct, and they will be able to
judge the feasibility of existing algorithmic solutions.
Communication: Students will be able to explain, in the language of graph theory, how
a problem at hand can be modelled and solved.
Learning skills: Students will enhance their study skills such as time management,
effective reading,
critical thinking and reading, exact and unambiguous writing and formulation of ideas
and statements, and reflection on marked (graded) work. Along the way, students will
improve general learning skills such as self-motivation, careful listening and giving
instructions, and openness to new knowledge.
Study material: Appropriate material will be provided during the course.
Recommended literature: None.
Exam: Written exam (80% of the final grade). Weekly graded exercises (20% of the final
grade).
ECTS: 4
Period 2.2
Machine Learning (Code: KEN2240)
Examiner: Dr. E.N. Smirnov, Dr. E. Hortal Quesada and Dr. M. Popa
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Computer Science 1, Calculus, Linear Algebra,
Logic, Probability and Statistics
Prerequisites: None
Description: Machine learning is a major frontier field of artificial intelligence. It deals
with developing computer systems that autonomously analyse data and automatically
improve their performance with experience. This course presents basic and state-ofthe-art techniques of machine learning. Presented techniques for automatic data
classification, data clustering, data prediction, and learning include Decision Trees,
Bayesian Learning, Linear and Logistic Regression, Recommender Systems, Artificial
Neural Networks, Support Vector Machines, Instance-based Learning, Rule Induction,
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
34
Clustering, and Reinforcement Learning. Lectures and practical assignments emphasize
the practical use of the presented techniques and prepare students for developing realworld machine-learning applications.
Knowledge and understanding: After successful completion of the course, students will
be able to describe and explain the basic machine learning algorithms. Students will
understand the mathematical foundation of machine learning algorithms and how
mathematical methods are successfully combined to obtain the variety of machine
learning algorithms that are currently available.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will acquire the knowledge able to
apply, formulate, and validate techniques from machine learning and to apply basic
machine learning algorithms on real-life problems. Students will be able to implement
machine-learning algorithms in software and to apply existing machine learning
software implementation to datasets. Students will have the necessary knowledge
to design, implement, and apply data processing systems that autonomously extract
information from data, interpret results, and make decisions.
Making judgements: Student learn how to critically analyse real-world problems, to
select appropriate machine learning techniques according to the specific problem, and
to predict the consequences of their choices. After successful completion of the course,
students gain the ability to judge which problems can be solved better and to which
extend through the application of machine learning techniques. Students obtain an
awareness of and responsibility for ethical and social consequences of developments in
and application of machine learning.
Communication: The skills acquired during the course will allow students to present
the results of different stages of the application of machine-learning techniques to
specialists or non-specialists.
Learning skills: After successful completion of the course, students can analyse, adapt,
design, implement, and critically reflect on machine-learning algorithms and tools.
Students also obtain the critical fundamental skills and knowledge to study further
advanced machine learning techniques in the professional literature.
Study material: Lecture material provided during the lecture.
Recommended literature:
• T. Mitchell (1997). Machine Learning, McGraw-Hill, ISBN-13: 978-0071154673.
• H. Blockeel, Machine Learning and Inductive Inference (course text), Uitgeverij ACCO,
2012.
• I.H. Witten and E. Frank (2011). Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools
and Techniques (Third Edition), Morgan Kaufmann, January 2011, ISBN-13: 978-
0123748560.
Exam: Written “open-book” exam at the end of the course. During the course, students
receive several graded assignments that can earn them a maximum bonus grade of 1.0.
ECTS: 4
Linear Programming (Code: KEN2520)
Examiner: Dr. S. Kelk.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Linear Algebra.
Prerequisites: None
Description: A linear program is very different to, say, a Java program. It simply consists
of a linear objective function (of potentially very many variables) and a set of linear
inequalities. The goal is to find values of the variables, which maximize or minimize
the objective function, subject to all the inequalities being satisfied. Linear programs
- even very large linear programs - can be solved extremely quickly, in both theory and
practice. The model is also expressive enough to capture a large number of real-world
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
35
problems. These two factors explain the fundamental role of linear programming
in operations research, computer science, economics, management and many other
fields. The course consists of an in-depth study of the simplex algorithm (a standard
algorithm for solving linear programs), duality theory, and sensitivity analysis.
Examples from practice illustrate the power of the model and teach the student
the skill of modelling. Practical aspects of linear programming (e.g. use of software
packages for solving linear programs, and integration with languages such as Java) are
also considered.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to identify which real-world
optimization problems can be formulated as linear programs. Students will be able
to describe the mathematical foundations of the Simplex algorithm for solving linear
programming, and articulate how these foundations impact upon the performance of
the Simplex method in practice. Students will recognize the power and importance of
duality theory for reasoning about the behaviour of linear programs (in particular with
regard to sensitivity analysis). Students will be able to exhibit an awareness of nonSimplex paradigms for solving linear programs (interior-point methods) and be able to
recount the importance of the linear programming model in operations research and
applied mathematics.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to 1) translate
mathematical models into linear programs, 2) to apply the Simplex method by hand
to solve small linear programs, 3) to show how the Simplex method behaves in
normal and exceptional cases, 4) to manipulate the algebra underpinning the Simplex
method, 5) to combine insights from this algebra and primal-dual relations to make
rigorous statements about the (sub)optimality of solutions to linear programs, 6) to
argue how small changes to linear programs impact upon their optima (sensitivity
analysis), 7) to explain key differences between the Simplex method and interior-point
methods, and to 8) leverage linear-to program arguments when developing simple
algorithms for combinatorial optimization problems.
Making judgements: Students will be able to distinguish between mathematical models
that can and cannot be cast as a linear program. Students will be able to contrast and
compare the behaviour of the Simplex algorithm with interior-point methods. Students
will be able to select, out of a large range of algebraic and duality-based instruments,
appropriate tools for making rigorous statements about linear programs.
Communication: Students will be able to formulate linear programs and defend
their correctness. Students will be able to clearly articulate and defend algebraic and
duality-based arguments concerning linear programs.
Learning skills: By the end of the course, students will be able to autonomously and
critically reflect upon the appropriateness of the linear programming paradigm
for tackling optimization problems arising in practice and be able to assess the
correctness of mathematical arguments pertaining to linear programming. Students
will be able to identify follow-up literature, which goes beyond the scope of the
material presented in the course.
Study material: Hillier & Lieberman (2010 or 2015): Introduction to Operations
Research (9th or 10th edition). McGraw Hill, ISBN 978-007-126767-0 or ISBN
9781259162985.
Recommended literature: students are beforehand encouraged to refresh their
knowledge of: (unique) solutions of systems of linear equations, matrix inversion, and
matrix rank.
Exam: Written exam and optional weekly bonus exercises (the results of which are
added to your exam score, up to 10%).
ECTS: 4
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
36
Reasoning Techniques (Code: KEN2230)
Examiner: Dr. C. Sironi and Prof. dr. M.H.M. Winands
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Data Science and Artificial Intelligence; Logic.
Description: Central in this course is how, based on available data, new knowledge
and information can be obtained using reasoning processes. The following four
techniques are discussed:
(1) Problem solving using search: problem types, blind-search methods, informedsearch methods, comparison of search methods, games as search problems, minimax,
alpha-beta pruning, chance games.
(2) Reasoning using logic: syntax, semantics, and inference in propositional logic and
in first-order logic, situation calculus, forward and backward reasoning, completeness,
resolution.
(3) Planning: planning in situation calculus, representation of states, goals and
operators, state space and plan space, partially ordered planning.
(4) Reasoning with uncertainty: uncertainty and probability theory, conditional
probability, the Rule of Bayes, semantics of and inference in belief networks, the
principle of maximum utility, multi-attribute utility, influence diagrams.
Knowledge and understanding: Students learn to understand how problems can
be represented as search problems, as logical problems, as planning problems or as
problems involving uncertainty and get accustomed to reasoning methods to solve
problems of all four types mentioned above.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students learn to apply the reasoning
methods learned to toy problems and some more complex situations
Making judgements: Students learn to judge which type of knowledge
representation is suitable for the problem at hand and which reasoning technique is
suitable to solve the problem at hand.
Communication: the knowledge representation used and reasoning technique
chosen must be easily understandable by peers and others experts
Learning skills: Students are able to critically reflect on their own and other’s chosen
representations and used reasoning methods.
Study material: Russell, S.J. and Norvig, P., Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach,
3rd edition. Pearson International Edition, 2010.
Recommended literature: Luger, G.F., Artificial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies
for Complex Problem Solving, 6th
edition. Pearson International Edition, 2009.
Exam: Written exam; during the course the students will receive three assignments,
that, if they receive a sufficient grade, may earn them up to a total of one bonus point.
Period 2.3
Project 2-1 (Code: KEN2300)
Examiners: Dr. J.W.H.M. Uiterwijk and Dr. M. Mihalák.
Coordinator: Dr. K. Schüller
Tutors: Dr. K. Schüller and Dr. M. Musegaas
Prerequisites: Students must have passed Project 1-1. Furthermore, the student
has to have passed at least two out of the following three courses: Introduction to
Computer Science 1, Introduction to Computer Science 2, and Data Structures and
Algorithms. This project is a prerequisite for Project 3-1.
Description: Students work on a project assignment in small groups of about six
students. The group composition is announced at the beginning of period 2.1 and
remains the same for the whole project. The students are guided through the project
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
37
by a fixed tutor. The project assignment is divided into three subtasks (one per period)
and is related to the content of the courses from period 2.1 and 2.2. In periods 2.1 and
2.2, the students work on the project, while also having to attend the courses of these
periods. They meet their tutor approximately once a week. In period 2.3, the students
work three weeks full-time on the project and meet their tutor twice a week.
At the beginning of each period, the students have to hand in a planning for the
current phase. At the end of each period, the students have to give a presentation and
the source code, presentation and an overview of who did what need to be uploaded
to Student Portal. While the presentations at the end of period 2.1 and 2.2 are in
front of the examiners and the tutors, the presentations at the end of period 2.3 will
additionally be in front of the fellow students. In period 2.3, they furthermore have to
hand in a report and attend a product and report examination.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will learn to concretize project
assignment and construct and maintain a planning. Furthermore, they will learn
formulating, selecting and validating models for the game chosen and collect and
interpret experimental data with evaluation metrics. Lastly they will improve their
ability to plan and chair meetings, create notes for minutes, work in a team such that
the workload is balanced and plan teamwork by setting deadlines and distributing tasks.
Making judgement: After completing this project, students will be able to compare
and criticize results, position them in terms of the literature diagnose limitations and
formulate a discussion
Communication: Students will be able to write a scientific paper that describes the
project, explains the methods, summarizes the outcomes, discusses them and makes
the conclusions. Students will be able to present and defend project in English and
coordinate project progress in project meetings
Learning skills: Students will be able to reflect on the progress of the project and study
relevant literature to solve problem at hand
Study material: Project manual project 2-2, Maastricht University, DKE.
Assessment: Final grade = 0.15 x grade of phase 1 + 0.15 x grade of phase 2 + 0.7 x
grade of phase 3, where grade of phase 3 = 45% grade for product + 35% grade for
report + 10% grade presentation + 10% grade project management. Missing project
meetings and skill classes will cause an individual grade reduction of the final grade.
Furthermore, the examiners may deviate from the group grade for individual students
if they either contributed significantly more or less than other group members.
Skill Classes:
LaTeX (period 2.1)
The students will learn to set up a LaTeX environment on their computers. Furthermore,
they will learn the basic aspects of LaTeX such as figures, tables, referencing and
formulas. In the end of the course, the students will be able to write reports and articles
with LaTeX.
Systematic Search Strategies (period 2.2)
During this class, you learn more about how to elicit and evaluate relevant scientific
background information for writing a project report. By the end of this class, you will be
able to apply systematic search strategies - usable in multiple databases.
Legal aspects of Data Science (period 2.2)
In this session, you will get an introduction into the basic principles of the GDPR. By the
end of this session, you will be able to grasp the key actors, concepts and obligations
of the GDPR, and develop awareness and understanding of the legal requirements you
will encounter in your professional career.
ECTS: 6
BSc Student Handbook 2020-2021
38
Period 2.4
Theoretical Computer Science (Code: KEN2420)
Examiner: Dr. G. Stamoulis
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Discrete
Mathematics, Data Structures and Algorithms.
Description: This course explores the theoretical underpinnings of computing by
investigating algorithms and programs casted as language recognition problems.
The influence of the theory on modern hardware and software system design is
demonstrated. The following subjects will be treated: mathematical foundations,
alphabets and languages, finite automata and regular languages, Turing machines,
acceptance and decidability, recursive functions and grammars, time complexity classes,
NP problems, NP-completeness
Knowledge and understanding: Students will learn to comprehend the inherent
complexity of problems and be able to motivate why some problems are inherently more
difficult than others are. They will learn to have insight into how complex problems can
be solved efficiently and will be able to classify such problems into a language hierarchy
and complexity classes. Furthermore, students will be able to apply the tools needed for
such classification
Applying knowledge and understanding: students will be able to apply the theory
learned to solve small-scale problems
Making judgements: Students will learn to judge which problems are decidable and
efficiently solvable and to judge which technique is suitable to solve the problem at hand.
Communication: The knowledge representation used and technique from complexity
theory chosen must be easily understandable by peers and others experts
Learning skills: The student will learn to reflect on own one’s and other’s thoughts on
complexity and solvability of problems.
Study material: Elaine Rich (2008), Automata, Computability and Complexity, Prentice
Hall, New Jersey, ISBN 0-13-228806-0.
Exam: Written exam; during the course the students will receive three assignments, that,
if they receive a sufficient grade, may earn them up to a total of one bonus point.
ECTS: 4
Mathematical Modelling (Code: KEN2430)
Examiner: Dr. J. Karel and Prof. dr. ir. R. Peeters.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Linear Algebra, Calculus, Matlab.
Prerequisite: None.
Description: Mathematical modelling is of great importance for solving practical problems
by casting them into a form suitable for the use of mathematical techniques. In this
course, a number of basic topics are discussed. First, attention is paid to a framework
for mathematical modelling. Then we focus on some widely used model classes from
engineering, in particular on the class of linear time-invariant dynamical models. These are
described by linear difference equations (in discrete time) or linear differential equations
(in continuous time). Alternative model descriptions that are discussed are transfer
functions (in the frequency domain) obtained with the z-transform and the Laplace
transform respectively; and state-space models, which may or may not involve canonical
forms. Some further topics receiving attention are the concepts of stability, sinusoidal
fidelity, Bode diagrams, the interconnection of subsystems, and the technique of pole
placement by means of state feedback. The subject matter is clarified through exercises
and examples involving practical applications. Also, relevant functionality in Matlab is
introduced, which offers a powerful instrument for analysing linear dynamic models.
BSc
Knowledge and understanding: Being able to formulate linear dynamical models, state
properties and define representations. Identify frequency domain properties of systems
and relate them to applications in signal processing.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Being able to construct elementary
mathematical models. Perform model analysis and extract model properties. Employ
various model representations and choose the most appropriate one. Compute statefeedback control.
Making judgements: To recognize what are the important aspects to consider when
building a mathematical model. Decide on stability of models.
Communication: Being able to convey properties of models to specialists and nonspecialists.
Learning skills: Being able to independently find Matlab functionality to solve basic
problems in systems theory.
Study material: Lecture notes.
Recommended literature: Richard J. Vaccaro, Digital Control: A State-Space Approach,
McGraw-Hill, 1995, ISBN 0-07-066781-0.
Exam: Written exam and assignments and/or bonus assignments.
ECTS: 4
Human Computer Interaction and Affective Computing (Code: KEN2410)
Examiner: Dr. S. Asteriadis.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Machine Learning, Probabilities and Statistics.
Description: Human -Computer Interaction (HCI) is the study of interaction between
people (users) and computers. It is often regarded as the intersection of computer
science, behavioural sciences, design and several other fields of study. Interaction
between users and computers occurs at the user interface, which includes both
software and hardware; for example, characters or objects displayed on a personal
computer’s monitor and input received from users via hardware peripherals such as
keyboard, mouse and web cameras. This course also covers Affective Computing, a
new branch of HCI that places emphasis on user emotions and personality. Affective
Computing attempts to bring emotions into intelligent interfaces that interact with
humans and see how they can have a positive and constructive impact in humanmachine interactions.
Knowledge and understanding: The course shows guidelines for the design,
implementation and evaluation of HCI systems and addresses interaction styles with
the user. Students will be able to identify ways to involve user emotion, personality
and cognition in the design of an HCI intelligent interface.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to apply stages
of successful user interface design. Formulate user interview techniques, rapid
prototyping, design interfaces and conclude on user needs in business-like scenarios.
Making judgements: Students will show awareness of how to involve the user in
the design procedure and solve HCI problems based on judgement analysis of user
evaluations and interviews.
Communication: Students will be able to present their prototypes, communicate and
defend their results. They will be able to examine existing interfaces and they will
ground their findings based on HCI guidelines
Learning skills: Students will be able to describe a course of action for designing humancentric systems, applicable in a variety of social and business practices. They will be able
to establish links among Machine Intelligence, Affective Interactions and Statistical
analyses in the design of user-centered interfaces. They will be able to use these skills in
constructing personalized solutions, quantitatively analyse and apply user needs, design
Student Handbook 2020-2021
39
BSc
emotion-capturing techniques by using computational models of affect.
Study material: Lecture Slides and other sources that will be made available.
Recommended literature:
• Shneiderman B, Plaisant C, Cohen M, Jacobs S, Elmqvist N, Diakopoulos N. (2016)
Designing the user interface: strategies for effective human-computer interaction.
Pearson, ISBN: 978-0134380384
• Calvo RA, D’Mello S, Gratch JM, Kappas A, (2015). The Oxford handbook of affective
computing. Oxford University Press, ISBN: 978-0199942237
• Coursera video lectures of Scott Klemmer and accompanying slides.
Exam: Individual (90% of final grade) and group (10% of final grade) assignments.
ECTS: 4
Period 2.5
Philosophy & Artificial Intelligence (Code: KEN2120)
Examiner: Dr. D.M. Cressman.
Prerequisites: none.
Description: One of the characteristics of scientific knowledge is the translation of
natural phenomena into quantitative or mathematical data – the book of nature,
Galileo wrote, is written in the language of mathematics. Over the course of the
twentieth and twenty-first century, this desire to understand the world through the
logic of mathematics has been extended beyond the natural world to include such
things as human consciousness, learning, and intelligence. Indeed, the foundation of
what is called ‘artificial intelligence’ is the pursuit of replicating human consciousness
and intelligence through mathematical models and formulas. In this course we will
examine these issues from a philosophical perspective, beginning with a basic overview
of the philosophy of science with an emphasis on quantification and then moving
on to study philosophical issues that have developed out of the pursuit of artificial
intelligence. We will begin with classic thinkers in the field like Alan Turning, Hubert
Dreyfus, and Joseph Weizenbaum and continue through to contemporary philosophical
studies of cutting edge attempts to develop types of machine learning that aim to
mimic human forms of learning.
Knowledge and understanding: At the conclusion of this course, students should be
able to demonstrate knowledge of the following topics through written essays:
- The history of computing and artificial intelligence
- The history and philosophy of scientific knowledge with an emphasis on Kuhn’s
theories of scientific paradigms
- Historical and philosophical theories of technology and society
- The philosophical presuppositions of artificial intelligence
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to draw upon both
lectures and readings to write an essay that exhibits critical reflections on conventional
and naïve notions of instrumentalism, technological determinism, and functionalism
by persuasively arguing for a contextual approach that highlights the contingency and
flexibility of design and meaning.
Making judgements: Students are asked to select relevant passages from texts that
contribute to the argument that they make in the essay. This will be graded. In tutorials,
students are asked to make decisions about specific problems (i.e. self-driving cars,
Turing tests). This is not graded.
Communication: During tutorials, students present their work orally to their
classmates.
40 Learning skills: Students will be able to articulate and solve problems in groups. Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
Students will also be expected to engage with a number of theories concerning
computation and artificial intelligence through different texts and will be asked to
reflect upon and critique these theories.
Study material: Selected texts will be made available.
Exam: Take home exam (essay).
ECTS: 4
Simulation and Statistical Analysis (Code: KEN2530)
Examiner: Dr. J. Karel and Dr. A. Wilbik
Prerequisites: none
Desired Prior Knowledge: Probability & Statistics, Calculus, Matlab, and Java.
Description: Mathematical simulation is concerned with studying processes and
systems. Uncertainty can be an important factor and has to be modelled properly. After
modelling a complex system, various scenarios can be simulated, using Monte Carlo
simulation, to gain insight. The results need to be properly interpreted and uncertainty
has to be reduced. The modelling, implementation, analysis and technical aspects
will be discussed as an introduction in this field. Emphasis will be on discrete event
simulation and the statistical analysis of the output of simulation studies, where topics
are: modelling, Poisson processes, random number generators, selecting and testing
input distributions, generating random variates, statistical analysis of experiments and
variance reduction. Practical exercises will be used to place the techniques in context.
Knowledge and understanding: Define concepts of simulation and discrete event
simulation. Explain techniques underlying mathematical simulation. Recall and explain
methods for analysing simulation output and efficient simulation including their
assumptions, justify why they are important, and match them to simulation design.
The use of Knowledge and understanding: Being able to model a system in a structured
manner, to design and implement simulators for systems, and to collect data from these
simulations. In addition, you will be able to employ techniques underlying mathematical
simulation and apply methods for analysing simulation output and efficient simulation.
Making judgements: Being able to choose and motivate alternative techniques
underlying mathematical simulation. Choose, motivate and contrast methods for
analysing simulation output and efficient simulation.
Communication: Being able to convey the phases of a specific simulation study to
non-experts.
Learning skills: The ability to independently learn to handle large-scale simulation.
To identify shortcomings in data analysis.
Study material: Simulation Modeling and Analysis (5th edition) -Averill Law
Recommended literature: Object-Oriented Computer Simulation of discrete-event
systems – Jerzy Tyszer, Design and Analysis of Experiments – Douglas C. Montgomery,
Introduction to Probability Models – Sheldon M. Ross.
Exam: Written exam and assignments and/or bonus assignments
ECTS: 4
Natural Language Processing (optional course) (Code: KEN2570)
Examiner(s): Dr. J. Niehues
Tutors(s): None.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Computer Science 1 and 2, Probability and
Statistics, Machine Learning
Prerequisites: None
Description: Watson won Jeopardy. Siri can tell me when I need an umbrella. But how do
they work? Over the past decade, Natural Language Processing (NLP) was revolutionized 41Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
42Student Handbook 2020-2021
by statistical, probabilistic and machine learning methods. NLP addresses fundamental
questions at the intersection of human language and machine learning. How can
computers acquire, understand and produce language? How can computational methods
give us insight into observed human language phenomena? How to make sense of the
vast amounts of information available online in free, unstructured form? In this course
students will learn how computers can learn useful text/language representations and
how different tasks (language modelling, text classification, information extraction,
sequence labeling, etc.) can be used for solving different complex problems (spelling
correction, spam detection, search engine design, opinion analysis, summarization,
question-answering, etc.). Open NLP problems (such as evaluation or interactive dialogue
systems) and the effect of deep learning on NLP will be discussed.
Knowledge and understanding: By the end of the course, students are able to acquire
the basic text and language processing aspects. Furthermore, students are able to
describe basic NLP problems, tasks and methods.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are able to demonstrate how to
tackle a text/language problem and to formulate, design and implement a NLP system.
Students are able to suggest when a problem’s complexity requires an NLP solution.
Making judgements: Students are able to pose questions and define problems in
different domains (e.g. social sciences) and contexts (e.g. business) that include
language/text data. Furthermore, students are able to judge which tools are applicable
for solving these problems and to decide a course of action in accordance with ethical
and social consequences.
Communication: Students are able to outline an approach in real organizational
problems, which require NLP and are able to demonstrate, present and communicate a
solution to a NLP problem.
Learning skills: Students are able to master and choose the appropriate basic
programming tools for NLP and are able to follow up on literature that will allow them
to build complete NLP models.
Study material: Handouts
Recommended literature:
1) Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. “Speech and language processing an
introduction to natural language processing, computational linguistics, and speech.”
Pearson, London, 2000
2) Chris Manning and Hinrich Schütze, Foundations of Statistical Natural Language
Processing, MIT Press. Cambridge, MA. 1999
Exam: Practical individual assignments (30%) + Group Project (20%) + Open-Book
Written Exam (50%).
ECTS: 4
Introduction to Image and Video Processing (optional course)
(Code: KEN3238)
Examiner: Dr. Alexia Briassouli
Desired prior knowledge: Calculus, Linear Algebra, Machine Learning.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: Image and video processing is everywhere around us, in smartphones,
robotics, medicine, security systems, microscopy, remote sensing, video games, travel,
shopping, environmental management and many other applications. Image and video
processing is based on principles of signal processing, extended to multiple dimensions.
In this class students will have a short introduction to basic 2D signals and systems,
sampling, convolution. Color domain processing in different spaces and its relevance
to our visual perception system will be presented. We will learn about linear and
BSc
non-linear filtering in the spatial and frequency domains (Fourier, DCT), their relation
and applications like enhancement, noise estimation and removal, compression,
restoration. Compression standards for image and video and their relevance to
frequency transformations will be presented. Video analysis will include methods for
motion estimation, segmentation and introduction to action recognition, and video
standards. Lab examples and homeworks will accompany the classes.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will gain an in-depth knowledge of
image and video processing methods used all around us by understanding the
underlying theoretical foundations and obtaining insights into their role in numerous
applications. They will understand the mathematics and algorithms underlying
image and video analysis methods and see their results in practice through mini
projects.
Applying knowledge and understanding: The students will be able to immediately
apply basic image and video processing concepts to real world problems in the labs.
They will also have the opportunity to further demonstrate their understanding by
implementing them in mini projects.
Making judgements: By understanding fundamental signal/image processing
principles and seeing them work in practice, the students will be able to understand
how and where to implement and develop image and video analysis algorithms, as
well as build complex systems using and extending them.
Communication: Assessment will be based on mini projects with topics on image/
video processing chosen by the instructor (the students themselves are also free to
suggest subjects relevant to the class). The goal will be for them to learn to carry out
independent work, solve realistic problems based on the class material, as well as
effectively communicate their motivation and results both to a general and expert
audience by providing interesting demos, presentations and clearly structured reports.
Learning skills: Students will be able to carry out basic image and video analysis
algorithms, understanding and implementing the mathematics behind them. They will
solve small research questions within mini projects and will become familiarized with
the newer toolboxes and libraries, mostly in – but not restricted to - Matlab and Python.
Study material: Lecture slides and provided material. Gonzalez & Richard E. Woods,
“Digital Image Processing “.
Recommended literature: Computer Vision: a Modern Approach. D. A. Forsyth, J. Ponce
(online).
Exam: Three assignment (100%).
ECTS: 4
Period 2.6
Project 2-2 (Code: KEN2600)
Examiners: Dr. J. Niehues and Dr. A. Briassouli.
Tutor(s): Dr. K. Schüller.
Prerequisites: Students should have passed Project 1-2. Furthermore, the student
has to have passed at least two out of the following three courses: Introduction to
Computer Science 1, Introduction to Computer Science 2, and Data Structures and
Algorithms. This project is not a prerequisite for another project / course.
Description: In small groups, guided by the teachers of the subjects concerned and
by the tutor(s), a project is carried out. This project will be strongly related to the
content of the subjects from period 2.4 and 2.5. The specific project assignment will
be announced in time.
43Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will learn to concretize project
assignment and construct and maintain a planning. Additionally, they will learn
formulating, selecting and validating models for a concrete problem at hand and to
collect and interpret data with evaluation metrics.
Making judgement: After completing this course successfully, students will be able
to compare and criticize results, position them in terms of the literature, diagnose
limitations and formulate a discussion
Communication: Students will be able to write a scientific paper that: describes the
project, explains the methods, summarizes the outcomes, discusses them and makes
the conclusions. Furthermore, student will be able to present and defend project in
English. Coordinate project progress in project meetings
Learning skills: Students will learn to reflect on the progress of the project and study
relevant literature to solve problem at hand
Study material: Period book 2.4-2.6, Maastricht University, DKE.
Project skills Period 4: Interviewing and Questionnaires
In these project skills meetings we strategically look at how to formulate questions and
questionnaires that could be used in market research. Some language aspects will also
be reviewed to help with the question writing and formulation process.
Course Coordinator: Sarah Crielesi, MA
Tutor(s): TBA
Study material: Will be given out in lectures and tutorials.
Assessment: Attendance, activity participation in tutorials.
Project skills Period 5: Project Integration: How to Present Your Project
This second period will review both written and presentation skills and techniques
specifically in argumentative and persuasive settings. This review of basic skills and
further strengthening of your written and speaking skills help prepare you for your
presentation, your written report, and can also be applied to future research funding
applications.
Course Coordinator: Sarah Crielesi, MA
Tutor(s): TBA
Study material: Will be given out in lectures and tutorials.
Assessment: Attendance and activity participation in tutorials
Exam: The project will be assessed based on report, product, and presentation.
ECTS: 6
2.3 Curriculum of the Third Year of the Bachelor’s Programme
The first semester of the third year allows you to make your own selection of subjects
in the field of artificial intelligence, data science and operations research, the core areas
of the study of Data Science & Artificial Intelligence. In period 1 and 2, you can choose 6
out of 12 optional courses. The first semester of year 3 has the same structure in the
first and the second year; there are two periods of eight weeks and one period of four
weeks. There is also a project in period 3.3. Alternatively, students can choose to study
the first semester of the third year at a university abroad (for partner universities see
Section 1.4). Please refer to the separate ‘study abroad guide’ and contact your study
advisor for more information about study abroad. In periods 3.4, 3.5 and 3.6, you will
work on a bachelor’s thesis about a data science and knowledge engineering topic of
your interest.
In the diagram below we indicated the courses offered by DKE and the study load
expressed in credits (ECTS). A credit stands for about 28 hours of studying time
44 (teaching meetings and private study). Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
Year 3 ECTS
Period 3.1* Prolog (KEN3234) 4
Semantic Web (KEN3140) 4
Game Theory (KEN3130) 4
Robotics and Embedded Systems (KEN3236)
Computer Security (KEN2560) 4
Digital Society (KEN3111) 4
Project 3-1 (**)
Period 3.2* Large Scale IT and Cloud Computing (KEN3239) 4
Logic for Artificial Intelligence (KEN3231) 4
Parallel Programming (KEN3235) 4
Introduction to Bio-Informatics (KEN3440) 4
Software and Systems Verification (KEN3150) 4
Introduction to Quantum Computing (KEN3241) 4
Project 3-1 (**)
Period 3.3 Project 3-1 (KEN3300) 6
Period 3.4 Data Analysis (KEN3450) 4
Operations Research Case Studies (KEN3410) 4
Intelligent Systems (KEN3430) 4
Period 3.5 to 3.6 Bachelor’s thesis (KEN3500) 18
* Third year students choose three electives per period out of the optional courses during
period 1 and 2
** Project 3-1 will start in period 3.1 with weekly meetings. The credits for the project will
become available at the end of period 3.3.
For each period, we will give a short explanation of the various courses. Before the start
of each period, the students will receive detailed information about the content, the
study material, the teaching form, the schedule, and the examination method.
Period 3.1
Semantic Web (optional course) (Code: KEN3140)
Examiner: Prof. dr. M. Dumontier and Dr. K. Moodley
Desired Prior Knowledge: Logic.
Description: Most of the information available on the World Wide Web (WWW) is not
directly understandable for computers. For instance, web pages are designed for human
readability. Computer programs have difficulty in interpreting the information
presented on web pages. The focus on human readable information introduces
restrictions on what computer programs can do to support human users in tasks such as:
• finding information
• buying goods
• making travel plans
The Semantic Web should eliminate these restrictions by separating the content of what
is presented on a web page from the way it is presented. In recent years, the focus has
shifted to providing data, independent of webpages (for example: Linked Open Data (LOD)
Ontologies are used to provide a shared conceptualization of information. Ontologies
form the basis of the Semantic Web, Knowledge Based System, Databases, etc., and they
play an important role in data exchange and interoperability in many domains.
Ontologies are applied in the bio-medical domains, in data mining applications, in
Linked Open Data (LOD), in websites based on semantic technology, etc. 45Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
Since ontologies are intended to be shared between different systems, defining an
ontology is a challenging task.
This course will focus on the standards the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) is
defining in order to realize the Semantic Web. The course also addresses the underlying
knowledge representation formalisms of the current semantic web standards.
Moreover, the course will address the engineering principle of crating an ontology. Note
that the course does not address standards for making websites.
Knowledge and understanding: Making the student familiar with the developments
and standards of the Semantic Web. The student will get insights in semantic web
standard, such as RDF, RDFa, SPARQL and OWL2. Moreover, the students will get some
basic insight in the semantics of RDF and the Description Logic underlying OWL. Finally,
the student will be made familiar with the ontology development process, and criteria
for evaluating an ontology. The student should understand the role of upper ontologies
and ontology design patterns, as well as the philosophical choices they represent.
Applying knowledge and understanding: The student should be able to build
applications using semantic web standards such as RDF, RDFa, SPARQL and OWL2.
The student should also be able to develop an ontology for an application domain.
Making judgements: The student should be able to judge whether and how semantic
web standards can be applied in applications. The student should also be able to judge
the quality of an ontology.
Communication: The student should have sufficient understanding of the Semantic
Web and its standards in order to explain why and how an application should be set up
using semantic web standards. The student should also be able to explain and defend
the choices made in the ontology engineering process.
Learning skills: The student should be able to study the literature about semantic web
developments.
Study material:
• A Semantic Web Primer (3rd Edition). Grigoris Antoniou, Paul Groth, Frank van
Harmelen and Rinke Hoekstra, MIT Press, ISBN: 9780262018289.
•Semantic Web for the Working Ontologist (2nd Edition). Dean Allemang and Jim
Hendler. 2011. Morgan Kaufmann. ISBN: 978-0-12-385965-5. https://doi.org/10.1016/
C2010-0-68657-3
Recommended literature: The Semantic Web documents at the World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C) web site.
Examination: Individual assignments (3*10%) and a final written exam (70%).
Participation in the practical sessions is required for receiving a grade.
ECTS: 4
Game Theory (optional course) (Code: KEN3130)
Examiner: Prof. Dr. F. Thuijsman
Prerequisites: Discrete Mathematics.
Description: We introduce the field of Game Theory. Game Theory is the mathematical
study of problems, called games, that involve two or more decision makers, called players,
who each have their own individual preferences over the
possible outcomes. In a game, each player always aims to maximize their individual payoff
and chooses the actions accordingly. These actions may be probabilistic or deterministic,
depending on the situation. Meanwhile the player reasons logically about actions that
might be taken by the other players. A basic difference exists between strategic and nonstrategic models. Both types of models and their solution concepts will be discussed. Issues
46 like value, fairness, manipulations, threats, optimality and rationality will be addressed. Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
Knowledge and understanding: Students can recognize and classify the main types of
games, i.e. cooperative games, strategic games, bipartite matching problems, and
formulate the main solution concepts value, optimal strategies, Nash- and correlated
equilibrium, as well as a number of algorithms to calculate these.
Applying the use of Knowledge and understanding: Students can calculate solutions
for the different types of games
Making judgements: Students can explain advantages and disadvantages of different
solution concepts. They are able to judge correctness of solutions presented
Communication: Students can explain and defend correctness of their solutions
Learning skills: By the end of the course, students will be able to autonomously and
critically reflect upon the pros and cons of different types of games for modelling
competition and cooperation. This includes considerations on the computational
aspects with respect to different solution concepts.
Study material: Lecture notes.
Examination: There will be a closed book written exam at the end of the course.
ECTS: 4
Prolog (optional course) (Code: KEN3234)
Examiner: Dr. J.W.H.M. Uiterwijk.
Prerequisites: Logic, Introduction to Computer Science 1.
Description: This course offers an introduction to the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI),
based on one of the most important non-procedural programming languages: PROLOG. A
detailed introduction into this declarative programming language is given. As an
illustration, we will show how standard AI techniques can be applied in PROLOG and how
expert systems can be realized with it. The course will be supported by a practical training,
in which the acquired techniques can be put into practice in concrete PROLOG applications.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to formulate problems in a logical
context and to translate problem formulations into small PROLOG programs.
Furthermore, students will have acquired active programming experience in PROLOG
and are able to represent and manipulate data in knowledge-based systems
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will implement and test PROLOG
programs and are able to use a suitable PROLOG environment for developing and testing
programs. Furthermore, students can model problems in a logical way such that this
model easily can be transformed into a PROLOG program. Students will also learn how
typical PROLOG constructs, like recursive and functional programming, can be applied to
other domains
Making judgements: Students can analyze problems and decompose them in sub
problems suitable for solving and can judge when functional or declarative programming
languages seem more suited for their programming tasks than imperative languages
Communication: program constructs must be easily understandable by peers and others
experts
Learning skills: Students will learn to model logical constructs independently and to
critically reflect on one’s solutions
Study material: Bratko, I., PROLOG: Programming for Artificial Intelligence, 4th edition.
Pearson. 2012.
Recommended literature: Sterling, L. and Shapiro, E., The Art of Prolog: advanced
programming techniques. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 2nd edition, 1994.
Exam: Written exam; during the course the students will receive three practical
assignments, that, if they receive a sufficient grade, may earn them up to a total of one
bonus point.
ECTS: 4 47Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
Computer Security (optional course) (Code: KEN2560)
Examiner: Dr. A. Zarras
Tutor: Dr. A. Zarras
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Computer Science (1 & 2), Data Structures
and Algorithms, Software Engineering, Databases
Description: Computer security is the process of detecting and preventing
unauthorized and illicit access to a computer. As information systems have become
mandatory in the commercial world, coupled with the increased frequency of security
incidents, organizations now recognize the need for a comprehensive security
strategy. The course will introduce a wide range of topics in computer security and
online privacy. The main objective of the course is to cultivate a security mind set by
discussing various attack techniques and defences. Some of the topics we will explore
include computer security technology and principles, software security and trusted
systems, management issues, and Internet security.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will gain an in depth understanding of
computer security fundamentals and their application in real world scenarios. In
detail, they will understand the principles of a secure system and the potential
attacks that can compromise it.
Making judgements: By understanding the fundamentals of computer security and
by realizing their assignments, the students will be able to understand and avoid
mistakes when designing a system. In principle, after completing this course, they will
be able to design and develop secure systems on their own.
Communication: The class will consist of lectures in which several computer security
issues will be discussed. In parallel, there will be bonus assignments where the
students will have to solve some of the most important issues we discussed in
classroom. This way they will be able learn all the described principles in depth.
Learning skills: Students will be able to design and implement secure systems, avoid
common mistakes that can introduce vulnerabilities to their systems, and work on
real-world security problems.
Recommended literature:
- Goodrich & Tamassia. Introduction to Computer Security. Pearson.
- Tanenbaum & Bos. Modern Operating Systems (4th edition). Pearson.
Exam: Assignments and Project
ECTS: 4
Robotics and Embedded Systems (optional course) (Code: KEN3236)
Examiner: Dr. R. Möckel.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Calculus, Linear Algebra, Machine Learning.
Prerequisites: Introduction to Computer Science 1 and 2.
Description: Nowadays, a variety of products require that algorithms from data
science and artificial intelligence are adapted to and implemented in robotic and
embedded systems. Applications that heavily rely on intelligent robotic and
embedded systems include self-driving cars, autonomous drones, intelligent
industrial robots in (semi-) autonomous factories, smart phones, intelligent medical
devices, and distributed intelligent embedded devices in smart homes.
In this course, students receive an introduction to the fields of robotics, embedded
systems, and real-time control. Students obtain an overview of state-of-the-art
intelligent robotic and embedded systems in academia and industries. Students gain
hands on experience in programming embedded robotic systems using embedded
processors and a modular robotic system developed at DKE. Students learn about
48 communication standards for embedded systems, sensors, and actuators. Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
Student practise and strengthen their expertise in data science and Artificial
Intelligence by applying mathematical methods for controlling robotic systems:
They study control techniques including PID control, forward and inverse kinematics
as well as locomotion control and learning using central pattern generators. The
course concludes with a robot competition where students build and program robots
using a modular robotic system.
Knowledge and understanding: Students obtain knowledge in designing, building,
and programming robotic and embedded systems. Students learn how to apply
mathematical concepts like dynamic systems for controlling robotic systems in realtime. Students further obtain knowledge about sensors and motor control and study
the application of machine learning and mathematical methods for learning and
optimizing control parameters. Students receive training in the programming
language C - the most popular languages for programming microcontrollers.
Applying knowledge and understanding: After successful completion of this course,
students can analyse, apply, implement, and validate control techniques in embedded
and robotic systems with and without real-time constraints. Students can apply
techniques from machine learning, search, and optimisation to obtain parameters for
embedded control systems as required in many professional academic and industrial
applications.
Making judgements: Students learn to judge where real-time systems are required
and embedded systems can be beneficial. Students further learn to critically analyse
the use of robotic systems in a variety of scenarios and to make design choices for
robotic and embedded systems. By introducing students to a variety of state-of-theart robotic systems, the course lays the foundation so that students can process
professional literature in robotics and embedded systems.
Communication: Students will be able to 1) discuss robotic and embedded systems
professionally and critically, 2) plan, discuss, implement, and validate projects in
robotics and embedded, 3) present the results of project assignments in form of
video, and to 4) critically analyse and explain control techniques for robotic systems
to a general and professional audience.
Learning skills: Students are able to autonomously and critically reflect upon the
abilities and limitations of robotic and embedded systems in order to keep up with
new developments in the field. Students can further assess the capabilities and
limitations of their own solutions to a control or machine learning problem in
robotics, and to identify follow-up literature, which goes beyond the scope of the
material presented in the course.
Study material: Course material will be provided during the lectures.
Exam: The final course grade is 80% of the final written “closed-book” exam grade
plus 20% of the assignments grade.
ECTS: 4
Digital Society (optional course) (Code: KEN3111)
Examiner: Dr. K. Wenz
Prerequisites: none.
Desired Prior Knowledge: none.
Description: Digitalization has a profound impact on our society. We can observe
changes in different areas. What digital technologies do, what they look like and how
they relate to each other is not identical worldwide, but dependent on local practices
as well. Usually new technologies are understood as innovation and progress: and
indeed, digital technologies improve a broad range of domains, such as healthcare or
education. New possibilities as e.g. participation in our digital cultures arise but also 49Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
new inequalities, as the access and competences needed for participation are not
evenly distributed and the platforms that allow for participation also harbour new
mechanisms of control and surveillance. The pace and diversity of these developments
ask for continuous investigation and reflection. It requires work to shape and use
technologies in ways that contribute to the public good. Moreover, digital technologies
have also led to highly problematic developments such as electoral manipulation, fake
news and algorithmic discrimination.
Technological developments are often conceived as predefined or given. Does a
society’s technology drive the development of its social structure and cultural values?
Scholars in science and technology studies have shown that technology and society
are deeply intertwined. Technology is inherently social. Technologies are shaped by
people; they emerge and are embedded in social practices.
The aim of this course is to investigate the consequences of digitalization for our
society/societies. These consequences have been differently valuated: participation vs.
exploitation of users, innovation as enhancement vs. challenge, ethics and technomoral change vs./and sustainability. We will discuss digitalization from
- a social perspective when we read about digital participation and how technology
and society are intertwined
- a political perspective when we discuss activism, digital citizenship but also problems
of manipulation and verification (as in the case of fake news and deep fakes)
- a cultural perspective when we analyze imaginaries and discourses around
innovation of technology and promises being made
- a legal perspective when we discuss privacy and the attempts to adapt privacy laws
- an ethical perspective when we discuss design decisions, privacy but also technomoral change and questions of environment and sustainability.
The course is structured in the following way:
Transformations
(digital participation, digital citizenship, data-activism)
Imaginaries
(innovation and techno-moral change)
Disruptions
(fake news and deep fakes, sustainability and e-trash)
Knowledge and understanding: Student acquire knowledge on the impact of
digitalization on society.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students learn to understand the
interrelation between digital technology and sociality.
Making judgements: Upon completion of the course, students can reflect on ethical
challenges related to digitalization.
Communication: Students are able to communicate central topics related to
digitalization to an audience of non-IT-experts (e.g. the debate will bring students
from the FASoS BA Digital Society and DKE students following this course together to
train both groups to communicate topics related to digitalization from a social science
and IT perspective.)
Learning skills: Students have acquired the learning skills to reflect critically in written
form on a topic related to the digital society but also to do so orally in a presentation
and debate.
Study material: The literature will be made accessible via the reference list of the
library.
Exam: (group) presentation in class (1-3 students) per task (25% of the final grade), 2
short academic papers of 1500 words each (2x25% of the final grade) and
50 participation in a final debate (25% of the final grade) Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
The resit of the different parts will be as follows:
If a resit is needed for the (group) presentation the presentation will be given via video
(e.g. Zoom or Skype)
If a resit is needed for the papers they can be rewritten and improved based on the
comments of your tutor
If a resit is needed for the debate (in case a student does not show or participate in the
debate) the student can write a 1500-word paper on the content of the debate
instead.
ECTS: 4
Period 3.2
Large Scale IT and Cloud Computing (optional course) (Code: KEN3239)
Examiner: Dr. Thomas Eifert, Bastian Küppers, M.Sc.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Computer Science 1, Databases
Prerequisites: none
Description: The course offers a comprehensive introduction to the field of scalable IT
systems, so-called “Big IT”, and cloud computing. After a technical introduction to the
available methodologies of setting up and running scalable systems, use cases are
presented. These use cases emphasize the correlation of the processes and
requirements of large institutions and possible technical solutions. A special focus is
put upon the question which technological platform is best used for which use case as
well as process aspects of scaling. Security aspects specific to cloud computing are
discussed along the use cases. Cloud computing, as a special case of scalable IT, is
discussed in detail. Different cloud providers are presented and evaluated in the
context of university requirements, i.e. requirements posed by research and teaching
processes.
Knowledge and understanding: Students acquire an overview of existing technologies
for scalable systems, and specific security requirements for the different use cases.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are able to understand scalability
and are able to set up and use a scalable IT system. In addition, students are able to
evaluate high scalable IT solutions in terms of benefits and security risks.
Making judgements: Students are able to analyze the requirements of a specific use
case and can decide which technology is best used for that case of application.
Communication: students are able to communicate about scalable IT systems and
specific security requirements.
Learning skills: Additionally, students are able to analyse the interdependencies
between large organizations, processes and IT solutions - taking into account securityrelated aspects - and to design suitable solutions using cloud offerings.
Study material: Lecture notes
Recommended literature: TBA
Exam: Assignments and Project
ECTS: 4
Logic for Artificial Intelligence (optional course) (Code: KEN3231)
Examiner: Dr. ir. ing. N. Roos.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Knowledge of propositional and predicate logic.
Prerequisites: Logic.
Description: Logics form the formal foundation of knowledge representation and
reasoning, which is a fundamental topic in Artificial Intelligence. Logics play a role as
an analysis aid and as a knowledge-representation formalism. Moreover, the 51Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
semantics of logics enables us to evaluate the intended meanings of knowledge
representation formalisms, and the correctness and completeness of reasoning
processes.
Humans make assumptions in their day-to-day reasoning. Examples of reasoning with
assumptions are common sense reasoning, model-based diagnosis, legal
argumentation, agent communication and negotiation, and so on and so forth. The
assumptions humans use in their reasoning may be incorrect in the light of new
information. This implies that conclusions may have to be withdrawn in the light of
new information. Therefore, this form of reasoning is called non-monotonic reasoning
and the underlying logics are called non-monotonic logics.
The course will cover model-based diagnosis as an application of reasoning with
assumption, standard logics extended with defeasible rules, argumentation systems,
and the semantics of reasoning with assumptions and defeasible rules, and closure
properties of the reasoning systems.
Knowledge and understanding:
- The student should be able to describe non-monotonic logics and argumentation
systems.
- The student should be able to identify the logic underlying specific forms of
knowledge representation.
- The student should be able to describe and discuss the semantic of non-monotonic
logics.
Applying knowledge and understanding:
- The student should be able analyze important properties of practical formalism’s for
knowledge representation and reasoning.
- The student be able to apply non-monotonic logics and argumentation systems to
practical problems
Making judgements:
- The student should be able to judge whether specific knowledge representation
formalism’s are able to represent the intended meaning of the knowledge to be
represented.
- The student should be able to analyze whether conclusions derived from a knowledge
representation are correct and complete.
Communication:
- The student should be able to explain how logic can be used as a tool for analyzing a
knowledge representation problem.
- The student should be able to explain issues involved in the handling assumptions in
a knowledge-representation.
Learning skills:
- The student should be able to study autonomously the literature describing the
applications of logics for knowledge representation and reasoning.
Study material: Syllabi.
Recommended literature: A syllabus and scientific literature.
Examination: Written exam at the end of the course. A bonus of 1.0 point can be
earned by a series of bonus assignments.
ECTS: 4
Parallel Programming (optional course) (Code: KEN3235)
Examiner: Prof. dr. Hans Pflug, Bastian Küppers M.Sc.
Prerequisites: Introduction to Computer Science 1 and 2, Data Structures and Algorithms.
Description: Parallel programming introduces the students to the paradigm of parallel
52 computing on a computer. Nowadays almost all computer systems include so-called Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
multi-core chips. Hence, in order to exploit the full performance of such systems one
needs to employ parallel programming. This course covers shared-memory
parallelization with OpenMP and Java-Threads as well as parallelization with message
passing on distributed-memory architectures with MPI. The course starts with a recap
of the programming language C followed by a brief theoretical introduction to
parallel computing. Next, the course treats theoretical aspects like MPI
communication, race conditions, deadlocks, efficiency as well as the problem of
serialization. This course is accompanied by practical labs in which the students have
the opportunity to apply the newly acquired concepts. After completing this course
students will be able to write parallel programs with MPI and OpenMP on a basic
level, and deal with any difficulties they may encounter
Knowledge and understanding: Students recall the basic concepts for parallel
programming and recognize important parallelization patterns.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are able to write parallel software
code using MPI, OpenMP, and Java Threads.
Communication: Students are able to explain why a specific pattern is adequate for a
given problem.
Learning skills: Students are able to study autonomously the literature describing
parallel programming in order to comprehend important details and problems of the
field.
Study material: Course notes and several codes will be provided online.
Recommended literature: Parallel programming with MPI; Peter Pacheco; Morgan
Kaufmann (1996); (a very early revision is available online)
Exam: Written exam.
ECTS: 4
Software and Systems Verification (optional course) (Code: KEN3150)
Examiner: Dr. Pieter Collins
Tutor(s): Dr. Pieter Collins
Desired Prior Knowledge: Reasoning Techniques, Theoretical Computer Science
Description: Have you ever written a program with a bug in it? Then this course is for
you! Software verification tools can check whether your program works by showing
that it correctly satisfies its specification, or finds a case in which it can go wrong.
Unlike unit testing and other software validation methods, verification tools use
formal methods to rigorously prove correctness. Similar techniques can be used to
show that (mathematical models of) cyber-physical systems work as designed.
In this course, we will start by and introducing the main notions of object-oriented
program verification, including pre- and post-conditions for methods, and class
invariants. We shall use Hoare logic to convert programs and their specifications into
logical statements to be proved. We shall apply these techniques to the verification of
simple programs written in Java.
In the second part of the course, we consider formal models of software and systems
as labelled transition systems (automata), using temporal logics for specification, and
consider the fundamental algorithms for verification. We shall apply these algorithms
to simple discrete verification problems, such as vending machines and
communications systems, modelled using a specification language such as SMV.
Finally, we will look at simple continuous systems, such as robots and electronic
systems, and show how to verify these using rigorous numerical methods based on
interval arithmetic.
Knowledge and understanding: By the end of the course, students are able to:
Recognise the difference between formal verification and validation. Explain the 53Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
various kinds of annotations used in program specification. State the deduction and
precondition rules of Hoare logic. Interpret linear temporal logic formulae. Distinguish
rigorous numerical methods, notably how interval arithmetic differs from floating-point.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are able to write formal
specifications for simple programs. Furthermore, students can use Hoare logic to
reduce program specification to first-order logic statements, and justify these. Students
are able to construct Büchi automata accepting temporal logic formulae and can apply
interval and affine arithmetic for verifying properties of continuous systems. Moreover,
students are able to write annotations for object-oriented software, use software for
model-checking discrete systems and use software for rigorous numerics to verify
safety of simple continuous systems.
Making judgements: Students are able to determine the most appropriate modelling
framework and verification tools for a given problem.
Communication: Students can Write and read formal specifications and can discuss
informal design goals and their translation into formal specifications.
Learning skills: Students will critically reflect on their own human reasoning and the
potential of digital computers.
Study material: Course notes.
Recommended literature: J.B. Almeida, M.J. Frade, J.S. Pinto & S. Melo de Sousa,
“Rigorous Software Development: an Introduction to Program Verification”, Springer, 2011.
C. Baier & J.P. Katoen, “Principles of Model Checking”, MIT Press, 2008.
L. Jaulin, M. Kieffer, O. Didrit & E. Walter, “Applied Interval Analysis”, Springer, 2001.
Exam: Written exam (100%)
ECTS: 4
Introduction to Bio-Informatics (optional course) (Code: KEN3440)
Examiner: Dr. R. Cavill
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Computer Science 1, MatLab.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: This course presents a general introduction to the fundamental methods
and techniques of bioinformatics in biomedical and biological research. The objective is
that the students will acquire a general understanding of bioinformatics methods at
the algorithmic level and will therefore be able to read and understand publications in
this field, and – to some extent – apply their knowledge to concrete biological
problems. This relates to the major areas of bioinformatics like sequence alignment,
phylogenetic analysis, gene finding, and gene expression analysis. This course consists
of a series of closely related lectures and computer classes, based on relevant real case
studies. In the lectures, the main theoretical aspects are presented. In the computer
practicals, the students work to analyse real data using the techniques they have
encountered. By extensively exploring the case study, the students acquire a thorough
understanding about the subject.
Knowledge and understanding: Students should be able to perform common analyses
on both sequence data and numeric data from omics experiments. This includes
sequence alignment, building phylogenetic trees, applying hidden Markov models,
detecting differentially expression and performing pathway analysis.
Applying knowledge and understanding: For all the above topics students should be
able to demonstrate the algorithms on paper with simple examples and apply the
algorithms appropriately on realistic datasets using a computer.
Making judgements: After successful completion of the course, students will be able to
judge the use, quality, and correctness of different bioinformatics algorithms and
54 results. Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
Communication: After this course, students will be able to explain the algorithmic
bases of bioinformatics problems and interact with biologists to provide
recommendations of analysis approaches in the situations studied.
Learning skills: After successful completion of the course, students will be able to
independently read bioinformatics literature to further their knowledge.
Study material: Introduction to Computational Genomics, A Case Studies Approach,
Nello Cristianini, Matthew W. Hahn, Cambridge University Press, 2006, Hardback and
Paperback (ISBN-13: 9780521856034 | ISBN-10: 0521856035).
Exam: Written exam (50%) + assignments (50%).
ECTS: 4
Introduction to Quantum Computing (optional course) (Code: KEN3241)
Examiner: Dr. Georgios Stamoulis.
Prerequisites: Linear Algebra.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Theoretical Computer Science, Data Structures & Algorithms.
Description: This course offers an introduction to the interdisciplinary field of quantum
computation. The focus will lie on an accessible introduction to the elementary
concepts of quantum mechanics, followed by introducing the mathematical formalism
and a comparison between computer science and information science in the quantum
domain. The theoretical capability of quantum computers will be illustrated by
analysing fundamental algorithms of quantum computation and its potential
applications.
Quantum technology has become one of the most prominent interdisciplinary fields of
recent research. This course will focus on introducing the mathematical concepts
underpinning quantum computation, and on explaining how this new computational
paradigm might potentially offer possibilities beyond the scope of conventional
computers. Topics that will be introduced and discussed include: (i) most common
models of quantum computation (e.g., quantum circuits and measurement-based
quantum computing). (ii) An exposition of the machinery borrowed from quantum
mechanics, such as superposition of states, quantum entanglement, (de)coherence etc.,
which gives rise to the potential speed-up of quantum algorithms over their classical
analogs. (iii) Some of the most common quantum algorithms (searching, factoring etc.)
and protocols (quantum teleportation, EPR paradox). The course will finish with an
exposition of potential applications of quantum computation and algorithms in other
fields (such as security/cryptography, AI, optimization etc.)
Important: no prior knowledge in quantum mechanics is assumed or required, and all
necessary concepts will be introduced and motivated from a mathematical and
theoretical computer science point of view. Possible quantum architectures and/or
related hardware issues will not be discussed.
Knowledge and understanding: By the end of this course, students are able to
understand the differences between classical and quantum computation: Where is the
computational power of quantum machines coming from? What are the limits of this
new computational paradigm? What does the term “quantum supremacy” mean and
why it is important? How likely is it ever to be achieved and what would it mean for our
current understanding of the computational landscape?
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are able to understand some of the
most famous quantum algorithms, and to demonstrate where their power comes from.
They will be able to judge how this potential computational power can be leveraged,
and how it can be applied to other fields in a beneficial way.
After successful completion of this course, students are able to understand and use the
mathematical framework of quantum computing to solve computational problems. 55Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
Making judgements: Students are able to judge and identify the settings where the
potential quantum power might be beneficial and how they can leverage this.
Students will further be able to analyse simple quantum algorithms for different
computational problems.
Communication: Students are able to discuss quantum computation critically and
judge not only its benefits but, equally important, its shortcomings. During lectures
and practical assignments, students will be exposed to a different way of thinking
about computation that will also enhance their understanding on classical
computation.
Learning skills: Students are able to critically read and understand scientific papers on
quantum computing. To explain and analyse quantum algorithms described in
quantum circuit or measurement-based quantum computing models. Finally, to
relate quantum complexity classes to the classical ones.
Recommended Study material:
• Isaac Chuang, Michael Nielsen, “Quantum Computation and Quantum Information”,
10th Anniversary Edition, Cambridge University Press, 2011.
• N. David Mermin, “Quantum Computer Science: An Introduction”, 1
st Edition,
Cambridge University Press, 2007
Course material will be also provided during the lectures.
Exam: The final course grade is 100% of the final written “closed-book” exam grade.
ECTS: 4
Period 3.3
Project 3-1 (Code: KEN3300)
Examiners: Dr. R. Möckel, Dr. A. Briassouli, Dr. Anna Wilbik
Tutor(s): Dr. R. Möckel and Dr. Dr. K. Schüller
Prerequisites: Project 2-1.
Description: Project 3-1 consists of two distinct tracks: a research project at DKE and a
professional project proposed by companies affiliated with BISS (Brightlands Institute
for Smart Society). In the first week of period 1, students indicate their preference by
ranking these projects. Groups are created by means of an algorithm that minimizes
regret, and allocates students to their most preferred options.
About the DKE project. Students work in small groups, guided by lecturers of the
subjects concerned and by the tutors. During the project, they apply their knowledge
in data science, knowledge engineering, and artificial intelligence to robotic systems.
Depending on their chosen specialization within their project group, students study
and search for solutions in at least one, typically in multiple of the following fields:
control, computer vision, signal processing, artificial intelligence, modelling and
simulation of physical systems. Students learn and practise the application of
autonomous adaptation and closed-loop control to obtain robust solutions that can
be successfully operated under real-world constraints.
During the BISS project, students participate in small groups and receive guidance
from a tutor, a teacher with knowledge of the subjects concerned, and a content
expert from the company. Students learn how to apply their knowledge in data
science, knowledge engineering, and artificial intelligence to solve real-world problem
that arise in a professional environment, and how to interact with a client from the
industry.
Project Skills period 3.1 & 3.2:
Group CV Check (online or on-site): during this class, you will receive tips and feedback
on how to write a professional résumé (i.e. Curriculum Vitae).
56Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
Networking skills (online or on-site): during this class, you will learn hands-on tips to
build an interesting network to support you in your search for a job or internship. Both
of the above classes are provided by instructors of the UM Career Services.
Study material: Period book 3.1-3.3. Maastricht University, DKE.
Exam: The project will be assessed based on report, product, and presentation.
ECTS: 6
Period 3.4
Data Analysis (Code KEN3450)
Examiner: Dr. G. Spanakis
Tutor(s): None.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Calculus, Linear Algebra, Mathematical Modelling &
Simulation, Machine Learning, Introduction to Computer Science 1 and 2.
Prerequisites: Calculus
Description: This course aims at preparing students on how to be a successful “data
scientist”. The crucial processes of inspecting, cleaning, transforming, restoring and
preparing data for modelling are tackled. Different types of data are going to be
explored through case studies (“clinics”) that a modern “data scientist” has to deal
with. Furthermore, several techniques from machine learning and mathematical
modelling (multiple regression, classification, tree-based models, dimensionality
reduction, etc.) are presented from the data analysis perspective and students learn
how to apply these techniques to different types of data. Finally, the cornerstone of
data analysis is presented: correct communication of the analysis outcome
(storytelling, visualization, etc.).
Knowledge and understanding: Students are able to illustrate and explain data
analysis and machine learning techniques with emphasis on modelling, and to give
examples of different domains where data analysis can be applied
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are able to examine datasets using
techniques learned in course, and to experiment with different techniques for data
modelling
Making judgements: After successful completion of the course, students are able to 1)
judge the quality of data (of any kind), 3) to justify and rank which techniques should
be applied in each problem and 3) to assess results of data analysis process
Communication: Students are able to present the results of different stages of data
analysis to specialists and non-specialists and are able to decide on the correct
communication medium (scientific, verbal and visual) of the analysis outcome
Learning skills: After successful completion of the course, students are able to suggest
options for tackling different datasets combining verbal, numerical/scientific and visual
descriptions, also taking into account the context cases (e.g. business, academic) or the
domain of application. Furthermore, students are able to formulate data descriptions
based on their characteristics and can suggest options for modelling data, doing basic
frequency analysis and dimensionality reduction
Study material: Handouts.
Recommended literature: Selected chapters from the following textbooks:
A. Downey, Think Stats: Exploratory Data Analysis
James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., Tibshirani: An Introduction to Statistical Learning (with
Applications in R)
J. Vanderplans, Data Science Handbook
S. Skiena, The Data Science Design Manual
J W. McKinney, Python for Data Analysis 57Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
Chris Albron, Machine Learning with Python Cookbook
Exam: Open-book Written Exam 50%, Data clinics 50% (30% individual assignments,
20% group assignments)
ECTS: 4
Operations Research Case Studies (Code: KEN3410)
Examiner: Dr. S. Kelk and Prof. dr. F. Thuijsman.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Linear Programming.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: Operations Research (OR) is concerned with the best way to assign scarce
resources to competing activities. It is for this reason an important branch of
mathematics that is widely used in industry to support economically efficient
decision making, but also in other application areas where discrete or stochastic
optimization has a central role. In this course we will explore a number of themes
both within deterministic OR (where all the problem data is known at the beginning)
and stochastic OR (decision problems involving uncertainty and randomness). Themes
within deterministic OR include the network simplex method (used for solving
minimum-cost flow problems), integer linear programming and non-linear
programming. Stochastic themes include queuing systems, Markov chains and
Markov decision problems. As background students will be introduced to the
methodological similarities and differences between OR and data science.
Knowledge and understanding: Students can recognize, classify and distinguish some
of the major types of OR models, i.e. transportation and network optimization
models, integer and non-linear programming, Markov chains and Markov decision
problems, queueing models.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students can apply a wide variety of
algorithms to calculate solutions for problems of the types mentioned above.
Students will be able to translate simple real-world/industrial optimization problems
into a format suitable for (variously) the transportation simplex, network simplex and
integer linear programming.
Making judgements: Students can explain advantages and disadvantages of different
models and algorithms. They are able to judge the correctness of solutions presented.
Communication: Students can explain and defend their solution methods.
Learning skills: Students will be able to critically reflect upon the scope and
limitations of the learned models, and be able to identify follow-up literature
describing paradigms, models and algorithms that go beyond the scope of the course.
Study material: Hillier & Lieberman (2010 or 2015): Introduction to Operations
Research (9th or 10th edition). McGraw Hill, ISBN 978-007-126767-0 or ISBN
9781259162985.
Recommended literature: None.
Exam: Written exam, worth 100% of the credit.
ECTS: 4
Intelligent Systems (Code: KEN3430)
Examiner: Dr. ir. K. Driessens
Desired Prior Knowledge: Machine Learning
Prerequisites: None.
Description: The course offers an introduction to intelligent systems. Based on the
metaphor of a computational agent (that is, a software program or a robot which
acts and interacts flexibly and autonomously in order to achieve some goal), basic
58 concepts and methods from agent technology are discussed. Topics covered are the Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
concept of artificial intelligence, characteristics of an agent and agent architectures,
agent cooperation and competition among agents, behaviour-learning agents in a
multi-agent environment. An emphasis is made on the complexity of interacting
agents, but also subsystems within a single agent. In the practical part of the course,
the students build up their experience with the implementation of a number of
different types of agents. Some topics of this course are discussed more extensively in
the master’s course Multi-Agent Systems and Advanced Concepts in Machine Learning.
Knowledge and understanding: Students are able to compare and discuss benefits
and drawbacks of a number of different agent technologies. They can also explain the
complexities arising from interactions between multiple techniques within a single
agent, and the interactions between agents and systems.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to implement of a
number of different types of agents architectures and agent-subsystems.
Making judgements: The student will be able to judge whether it is beneficial to use
agent technology over other approaches for handling a given problem, and which
agent architecture might fit best.
Communication: The student will gain a working knowledge of agent terminology
and will learn to motivate his/her choices concerning the application of agent
technology.
Learning skills: Students have to reflect upon their knowledge and recognize the
need for continued learning as they are confronted with the complexities involved
with applying the knowledge gained in their bachelor studies and linking individual
techniques into a working system.
Study material: Course slides; supplementary material consisting of research papers
and book chapters.
Recommended literature:
• Gerhard Weiss (Ed.) (2013, 2nd edition): Multiagent Systems. MIT Press. http://www.
the-mas-book.info • Mike Wooldridge (2009, 2nd edition): An Introduction to Multi
Agent Systems, Michael Wooldridge, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Examination: Written exam (80%) + assignments (20%).
ECTS: 4
Period 3.4 to 3.6
Bachelor’s Thesis (Code: KEN3500)
ECTS: 18
Bachelor’s thesis Data Science and Artificial Intelligence
At the end of the Bachelor’s study in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence each
individual student has to write a thesis. This thesis has to be designed as a scientific
paper of 8 to 10 pages using a standard (LaTeX) design. Students are expected to
conduct a pro-active and independent research on their topics. This includes the
search and reading of related work. The topics must be discussed with the potential
thesis supervisor(s) and a research plan must be submitted to and approved by the
Board of Examiners as an initial step. The thesis has to be accompanied by relevant
attachments and software. Students will present the thesis in a conference. This
means that a strict submission form will be used. In order to start working on the
thesis, a student needs to have obtained at least 140 ECTS (among which are 60 ECTS
of the first year, and 40 ECTS of the second year).
59Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
General procedure
below is an indication for these phases. A special bachelor’s thesis coordinator will
supervise the procedure and schedule.
November
Phase 0: Thesis Topic meeting
Potential topics and research fields will be presented by staff.
January
Phase 1: Topic selection
During the skills class, each student selects a topic (and problem statement). A thesis
supervisor with experience in the field of choice is appointed to each student. Every
student hands in a signed bachelor’s project plan to the bachelor’s thesis coordinator.
A special bachelor’s thesis coordinator will supervise the phase.
Periods 3.4-5: February - May
Phase 2: Research
In this period students conduct their own research. This will preferably be guided in
groups by the thesis supervisor. Further two seminars will be organised during which
the students present their progress. A special bachelor’s thesis coordinator will
supervise the phase.
Phase 3: Writing
Parallel to the research, a scientific article is written.
Period 3.6: June
In Period 6, the research is finished and the first version of the thesis is expected (first
submission). The thesis supervisor will evaluate the paper (or make sure this happens)
and gives a first reaction within around a week. A second assessor will also evaluate the
paper during this week. The second and final submission will take place at the end of the
second week of period 3.6 (concrete dates will be announced).
Phase 4: Preparation for presentation
In the second week of period 3.6, the preparation for the final presentation will start for
every student individually. The presentations will be accompanied with slides created
with PowerPoint (or similar) and have a maximum length of 10 minutes.
Phase 5: Presentation
The bachelor’s theses will be presented in the third week of period 3.6 in a scientific
conference setting. The presentations have a maximum length of 15 minutes per student
(including questions). The conference is open for all students and employees from Data
Science and Artificial Intelligence and anyone else who might be interested. The final
decision on the grade for the bachelor’s thesis will be made shortly after the presentations.
A special bachelor’s thesis coordinator will supervise the phase.
Re-sit: In case the student fails to present his/her work at the Bachelor conference, the
student gets one opportunity to defend his/her work at the next bachelor conference. If
the student does not participate at or pass any of those two conferences, the student has
to select a new topic and submit a new thesis plan. For students not finishing at the June
Conference, there is one re-sit possibility in a conference setting at the end of August.
Requirements for the bachelor’s thesis project
For the bachelor’s thesis, every student has to conduct a short scientific research project.
60 This can be an empirical as well as a theoretical research. The topic for the research Student Handbook 2020-2021
MSc
project is open, as long as it fits into the Data Science and Artificial Intelligence
program.
The department will offer a list of potential research topics. The topic and the research
questions have to be approved by the thesis supervisor. To achieve this, the student will
create a bachelor’s project plan using the form provided by the Board of Examiners
which contains the following:
• Date;
• Name of the thesis supervisor;
• Name of the second examiner;
• Title of the bachelor’s thesis, start- and end date of the thesis project and a planning;
• Short description of the research question;
This plan will be signed by the student, the thesis supervisor and the second examiner
and then handed in to the bachelor’s thesis coordinator. It is possible to execute the
bachelor thesis project as an external training period. This should be well defined in the
bachelor’s thesis plan. In this case, the plan should also include the name of the
company, the name of the external supervisor, the size of the project and any
agreements about compensation and confidentiality. The plan should also be signed by
the external supervisor. The external research will not start before period 3.5. The
research needs to be original in such a way that the thesis supervisor is convinced that
this research has not been done before. The research also needs enough depth and still
it must be possible to finish it in the set amount of time. It is possible for multiple
students to cooperate in a research project as long as it is clear who did what.
Moreover, every student has to write their own thesis reflecting their part of the
research.
Requirements for the bachelor’s thesis document
Content aspects
The thesis describes the cause, research question, approach and results of the
research. This has to be done in a clear, structured and scientific manner which
includes:
• a clear introduction in which the cause and research questions are presented;
• a clear conclusion, based solely on the already used thought out principles and
derived results;
• a clear line is shown between problem statements approach methods and the
derived results;
• a motivation of the followed approach;
• an adequate description of the followed approach;
• an honest, clear and concise description of the derived results, if necessary using
tables;
• a discussion of the results;
• the usage of relevant and recent literature;
• the correct usage of references;
• the adequate usage of the literature for the reasoning in the thesis.
Design aspects
The number of pages of the thesis is between 8 and 10 (no more, no less) in the
designated LaTeX format, including images and references. This thesis should at least
contain:
• title;
• author;
• abstract;
• one or two keywords; 61Student Handbook 2020-2021
BSc
• list of references;
• page numbers.
It goes without saying that the correct, scientific references are used for used resources
(by using the designated BiBTeX reference style). Images and tables are accompanied
by an index and caption. Mathematical formula, definitions, etc. have to be properly
designed and numbered. The start and end of mathematical formula have to be
properly defined.
Language aspects
The thesis has to be written in Dutch or English, considering correct spelling, syntactical
structure of sentences and structure of content in paragraphs. The target audience is fellow
Data Science & Artificial Intelligence students. Any jargon and/or abbreviations have to be
explained unless they are common knowledge for this audience (e.g. CPU).
Citations
It is allowed to use several short citations with a maximum length of two sentences.
These citations have to be clearly referenced and have to be typographically
distinguishable (that is, citations are placed in quotes). Non-allowed citations or
missing references will result in an unsuccessful result.
Assessment
The assessment will take place based on the contents and design of the thesis
and the presentation of this thesis.
62Student Handbook 2020-2021
MSc
2.4 Master’s Programmes Artificial Intelligence and
Data Science for Decision Making
2.4.1 Master’s Artificial Intelligence
General introduction
The Master in Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a two-year advanced programme organised by
the Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering. The focus of this
programme is on the understanding, design and creation of intelligent systems, such as
those used in robotic systems, games or artificial personal assistants. Artificial Intelligence has become a very active domain in both academia and industry. It has given rise
to computer programmes and robots that learn from experience, recognise and adapt to
patterns in their environment, and reason strategically in complex decision-making
situations.
The impact of the field of Artificial Intelligence is pertinent due to the key role it plays in
technological applications that have become indispensable in society, such as simple
personal assistants that adapt the settings of your smart phone to automatically
recognised activities (e.g. driving or attending a meeting, automated trading software
used in real markets to respond to rapid price changes, interactive computer games that
include human like opponents, robotic assistance in the exploration of dangerous
environments, etc.). In this master’s programme, you are trained to become an expert and
capable of dealing with todays and future challenges in the field of Artificial Intelligence.
The master’s programme Artificial Intelligence covers a range of subjects emphasizing
the following research topics as its core:
1) Intelligent techniques for playing and solving (board) games and controlling virtual
characters in video games;
2) Situated agents to study the control and coordination of embodied agents, i.e. robots
(e.g. autonomous flying robot swarms);
3) Multi-agent systems of collaborating autonomous intelligent systems;
4) Formal techniques for reasoning in agents and representing and communicating
knowledge;
5) Machine learning to extract useful patterns and knowledge from experience and make
predictions about the future;
The members of the teaching staff are actively involved in one or more of these research
topics. As a result, the educational contents of the courses relate directly to the research
performed.
2.4.2 Master’s Data Science for Decision Making
General introduction
Data Science for Decision Making is the science of making informed decisions. It has
widespread applications in business and engineering. In today’s world, many companies
and organisations collect all sorts of data in large amounts. They aim to extract useful
information from it, to recognize patterns and anomalies. Data Science for Decision
Making provides the mathematical tools to analyse and model these big data. It also
provides and uses the computational software that is the key to data science. 63Student Handbook 2020-2021
MSc
The two-year master’s programme in Data Science for Decision Making teaches the use
of applied mathematics to analyse and optimize processes, problems and operations.
Examples of applications are: discovering patterns in data such as images and time
series, scheduling customer service agents, optimising supply chains, controlling
dynamical systems, modelling biological processes, finding optimal strategies in
negotiation, and extracting meaningful components from brain signals.
The master’s programme Data Science for Decision Making covers a wide range of
research topics, focusing on the following ones in its core:
1) Data mining to extract useful patterns and knowledge from large data repositories;
2) Mathematical modelling and parameter estimation from data, system identification,
model approximation and reduction of model complexity;
3) Algorithm design and analysis to efficiently deal with the challenges that the evergrowing amount of data pose;
4) Mathematics and algorithms associated with modelling and solving planning/
scheduling problems.
The members of the teaching staff are actively involved in one or more of the research
topics. As a result, the educational contents of the courses relate directly to the research
performed.
64Student Handbook 2020-2021
MSc
Programme master’s AI Year 1 ECTS
Period 1 Foundations of Agents (KEN4115) 6
Intelligent Search & Games (KEN4123) 6
Research Project AI 1 (**)
Period 2 Multi-Agent Systems (KEN4111) 6
Advanced Concepts in Machine Learning (KEN4154) 6
Research Project AI 1 (**)
Period 3 Research Project AI 1 (KEN4130) 6
Period 4 Autonomous Robotic Systems (KEN4114) 6
1 Elective Course from the following set:
Algorithms for Big Data (KEN4254) 6
Dynamic Game Theory (KEN4251) 6
Computational Statistics (KEN4258) 6
Advanced Natural Language Processing (KEN4259) 6
Research Project AI 2 (**)
Period 5 2 Elective Courses from the following set:
Information Retrieval and Text Mining (KEN4153) 6
Deep Learning (KEN 4257) 6
Planning and Scheduling (KEN4253) 6
Computer Vision (KEN4255) 6
Research Project AI 2 (**)
Period 6 Research Project AI 2 (KEN4131) 6
Programme master’s AI Year 2
Period 1, 2, 3 Electives * 30
Period 4, 5, 6 Master’s thesis AI (KEN4160) 30
Programme master’s DSDM Year 1 ECTS
Period 1.1 Data Mining (KEN4113) 6
1 Elective Course from the following set:
Signal and Image Processing (KEN4222) 6
Mathematical Optimization (KEN4211) 6
Stochastic Decision-Making (KEN4221) 6
Research Project 1 (**)
Period 2 Model Identification and Data Fitting (KEN4242) 6
1 Elective Course from the following set:
Advanced Concepts in Machine Learning (KEN4154) 6
Applications of Image and Video Processing (KEN4244) 6
Information Security *with reservation (KEN4245)
Research Project 1 (**)
Period 3 Research Project 1 (KEN4230) 6
Period 4 Algorithms for Big Data (KEN4254) 6
1 Elective Course from the following set:
Building and Mining Knowledge Graphs (KEN4256) 6
Dynamic Game Theory (KEN4251) 6
Computational Statistics (KEN4258) 6
Advanced Natural Language Processing (KEN4259) 6
Research Project 2 (**)
Period 5 Planning and Scheduling (KEN4253) 6
1 Elective Course from the following set:
Symbolic Computation and Control (KEN4252) 6 65Student Handbook 2020-2021
MSc
Deep Learning (KEN4257) 6
Information Retrieval and Text Mining (KEN4153) 6
Computer Vision (KEN4255) 6
Algorithms for Data Visualization (KEN4213) 6
Research Project 2 (**)
Period 6 Research Project 2 (KEN4231) 6
Programme master’s DSDM Year 2
Period 1, 2, 3 Electives * 30
Period 4, 5, 6 Master’s thesis DSDM (KEN4260) 30
* Note: during the elective semester (first semester of year 2) of the master’s programme
it is possible to take electives from our other master’s programme or relevant master’s
programmes at Maastricht University (maximum of 13 ECTS outside DKE) or to
participate in a research project, a company internship or a study abroad semester at
one of our partner universities. Please contact exchange officer and/or the Study Adviser
for more information.
** The Research Project 1 will start in period 1.1 and 1.2 with weekly meetings.
The credits for the project will become available at the end of period 1.3. The Research
Project 2 will start in period 1.4 and 1.5 with weekly meetings. The credits for the project
will become available at the end of period 1.6.
Part of the Research project is a Project skill programme (all elements are mandatory).
Among the competences thought are advanced presentation and academic writing
skills.
66Student Handbook 2020-2021
MSc
Period 1.1
Datamining (Code: KEN4113)
Examiner: Dr. E.N. Smirnov
Desired Prior Knowledge: Statistics and Basic Machine Learning
Prerequisites: None.
Course Description: Data mining is a major frontier field of computer science. It
allows extracting useful and interesting patterns and knowledge from large data
repositories such as databases and the Web. Data mining integrates techniques from
the fields of databases, machine learning, statistics, and artificial intelligence. This
course will present the state-of-the-art techniques of data mining. The lectures and
labs will emphasize the practical use of the presented techniques and the problems
of developing real data-mining applications. A step-by-step introduction to datamining environments will enable the students to achieve specific skills, autonomy,
and hands-on experience. A number of real data sets will be analysed and discussed.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will acquire knowledge on data preparation,
data preprocessing, feature selection/generation, data mining, and model validation.
Applying knowledge and understanding: When confronted with real-life problems,
students will be able to identify data-analysis tasks. Then, they will be able to apply
data-mining techniques for supervised and unsupervised data-analysis. If necessary,
students will be able to design data-mining algorithms specific for the tasks they have.
Making judgements: Students will be able to assess the quality of data-mining
models, processes, results, and tools.
Communication: Students will be able to present the results of different stages of
data-mining processes to specialists or non-specialists.
Learning skills: Students will be able to recognize their own lack of knowledge and
understanding and take appropriate action such as consulting additional material or
other sources of help.
Study material: Course notes, slides, and other information made available.
Recommended literature:
Pang-Ning, T., Steinbach, M., Karpatne, A., and Kumar, V. (2018). Introduction to Data
Mining, 2nd Edition, Pearson, ISBN-10: 0133128903, ISBN-13: 978-0133128901
Exam: Written exam (80%) + practical assignments (20%).
ECTS: 6
Foundations of Agents (Code: KEN4115)
Examiner: Dr. ir. ing. N. Roos.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Logic, Calculus, and Probability Theory.
Description: Agents are autonomous computer programs, robots, humans, etc. Agents
operate in some environment, which they can observe, and in which they can realize
objectives through the execution of actions. Examples of environment in which
agents can operate, are computer game environments, the internet, and also the
physical world is case of robots and humans.
In this course, we address the problem of how an agent can act optimally in order
to realize its objectives. We will answer this question by investigating how we can
formally specify the agent’s environment, the agent’s objectives, the observations
the agent can make and the actions it can execute. We use the formal model to
investigate how the agent can determine an (optimal) behaviour realizing its
objectives.
The following formal models will be investigated:
• Markov Decision Processes, 67Student Handbook 2020-2021
MSc
• Partially Observable Markov Decision Process,
• logic-based models such as Epistemic Logic, Doxastic Logic, Dynamic Logic, and BDI
logics, and
• Game Theory.
Some examples of methods for determining the agents optimal behaviour addressed
in the course are: Value and Policy Iteration, Q-Learning, Planning, etc.
Knowledge and understanding:
• The student will be able to explain formal models for describing agents.
• The student will be able to verify whether the formal models are correct.
• The student will be able to explain the underlying assumptions of each formal
model.
• The student will be able to compare and discuss the differences between the formal
models.
• The student will be able to analyse important properties of formal models for
describing agent.
Applying knowledge and understanding:
• The student will be able to apply formal models for describing agents to solve
practical problems.
• The student will be able to assess which formal model is most suited for addressing
a practical problem.
• The student will be able to make a practical implementation of a formal model.
Making judgments:
• The student will be able to analyse which formal model of an agent is adequate for
specific problem domains.
• The student will be able to select the formal model of an agent that is adequate for
specific problem domains.
Communication:
• The student will be able to explain to its peers why a formal model of an agent is
adequate for specific problem domains.
• The student will be able to explain to its peers how a formal model of an agent
should be applied for a specific problem.
Learning skills:
• The student will be able to explain to its peers why a formal model of an agent is
adequate for specific problem domains.
• The student will be able to explain to its peers how a formal model of an agent
should be applied for a specific problem.
Study material: Syllabi, scientific papers.
Recommended literature: none.
Examination: Written exam at the end of the course. A bonus of 1.0 point can be
earned by a series of bonus assignments.
ECTS: 6
Intelligent Search & Games (Code: KEN4123)
Examiners: Prof. dr. M.H.M. Winands and dr. C. Browne.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Data Structures & Algorithms
Description: In this course, the students learn how to apply advanced techniques in
the framework of game-playing programs. Depending on the nature of the game,
these techniques can be of a more or less algorithmic nature. The following subjects
will be discussed:
(1) Basic search techniques. Alpha-beta; A*.
68 (2) Advanced search techniques. IDA*; B*, transposition tables; retrograde analysis Student Handbook 2020-2021
MSc
and endgame databases; proof-number search and variants; multi-player search
methods; Expectimax and *-minimax variants.
(3) Heuristics. World representations; killer moves; history heuristic, PVS; windowing
techniques; null-moves; forward-pruning techniques; selective search, GOAP.
(4) Monte Carlo methods. Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) techniques, enhancements
and applications; AlphaGo and AlphaZero approaches.
(5) Game design. Evolutionary game design; game quality metrics; self-play
evaluation; procedural content generation (PCG); puzzle design.
Knowledge and understanding: The student can explain basic and advanced search
techniques and can identify which of them to use either in a game context, or in
problems with a similar structure.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students have obtained the knowledge to
develop, program, analyse, and apply advanced techniques autonomously to a wide
variety of problems. They will also learn that adapting known techniques to fit a
given problem can achieve a better performance.
Making judgements: Students will be able to judge the quality of approaches
(systems or scientific publications) based on the techniques taught.
Communication: Students will be able to present the results of their game programs
and search algorithms to specialists or non-specialists.
Learning skills: Students will be able to familiarize themselves with Game AI
techniques beyond the scope of the course in order to solve a problem.
Study material: Course notes and other information made available.
Recommended literature:
• Millington, I. and Funge, J. (2009). Artificial Intelligence for Games, 2nd Edition
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, ISBN: 978-0123747310
• Russell, S.J. and Norvig, P. (2010). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd
edition. Pearson Education, New Jersey. ISBN 0-13-207148-7.
• Yannakakis, G.N. and Togelius, J. (2018) Artificial Intelligence and Games, Springer,
Berlin. ISBN 978-3-319-63519-4 (eBook) 978-3-319-63518-7 (hardcover)
Exam: Written exam (50%) + a large practical task (50%).
ECTS: 6
Mathematical Optimization (code: KEN4211)
Examiner: Dr. P. Collins
Tutor(s):
Desired Prior Knowledge: Simplex algorithm. Calculus, Linear Algebra.
Description: Optimization (or “Optimisation”) is the subject of finding the best
or optimal solution to a problem from a set of potential or feasible solutions.
Optimization problems are fundamental in all forms of decision-making, since one
wishes to make the best decision in any context, and in the analysis of data, where
one wishes to find the best model describing experimental data. This course treats
two different areas of optimization: nonlinear optimization and combinatorial
optimization. Nonlinear optimization deals with the situation that there is a
continuum of available solutions. A best solution is then usually approximated
with one of several available general-purpose algorithms, such as Brent’s method
for one-dimensional problems, Newton, quasi-Newton and conjugate gradient
methods for unconstrained problems, and Lagrangian methods, including active-set
methods, sequential quadratic programming and interior-point methods for general
constrained problems. Combinatorial optimization deals with situations that a
best solution from a finite number of available solutions must be chosen. A variety
of techniques, such as linear programming, branch and cut, Lagrange relaxation 69Student Handbook 2020-2021
MSc
dynamic programming and approximation algorithms are employed to tackle this
type of problems. Throughout the course, we aim to provide a coherent framework
for the subject, with a focus on consideration of optimality conditions (notably the
Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions), Lagrange multipliers and duality, relaxation and
approximate problems, and on convergence rates and computational complexity.
The methods will be illustrated by in-class computer demonstrations, exercises
illustrating the main concepts and algorithms, and modelling and computational
work on case studies of practical interest, such as optimal control and network flow.
Knowledge and understanding: By the end of this course, students will have a
strong foundation in nonlinear and combinatorial optimization. You will be able
to formulate real-life problems as optimization problems. You will understand
optimality conditions, including the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions and be able
to test for optimality. You will know how to solve a variety of general optimization
problems, including constrained nonlinear problems, and (mixed-) integer linear
problems. You will understand notions of duality and Lagrange multipliers, and be
able to apply techniques based on relaxation and approximation.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will know the advantages and
disadvantages of different methods, and be able to choose an appropriate method
for a given problem. You will be able to implement and test optimization algorithms
on a computer. You will be able to apply your knowledge to the solution of practical
problems and in developing new efficient algorithms.
Making judgements: Students will be able to select an appropriate solution method
for a given optimization problem, and judge the quality of the solution obtained.
Communication: Students will be able to discuss the development and use of
optimization algorithms.
Learning skills: Students will learn how to develop and implement mathematical
methods, select and evaluate algorithms, and formulate mathematical model of realworld problems.
Study material: Lecture notes, handouts.
Recommended literature:
1. Numerical Optimization, by Nocedal and Wright (Springer)
2a. Combinatorial Optimization, Algorithm and Complexity, by Papadimitriou and
Steiglitz (Dover Publications), or
2b. Combinatorial Optimization, by Cook, Cunningham, Pulleyblank and Schrijver
(Wiley-Interscience).
Exam: Written exam, closed book with formula sheet (100%)
ECTS: 6
Signal and Image Processing (Code KEN4222)
Examiner: Dr J. Karel and dr. P. Bonizzi
Desired Prior Knowledge: Linear algebra, Calculus, basic knowledge of Matlab. Some
familiarity with linear systems theory and transforms (such as Fourier and Laplace) is
helpful.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: This course offers the student a hands-on introduction into the area
of digital signal and image processing. We start with the fundamental concepts
and mathematical foundation. This includes a brief review of Fourier analysis,
z-transforms and digital filters. Classical filtering from a linear systems perspective is
discussed. Next wavelet transforms and principal component analysis are introduced.
Wavelets are used to deal with morphological structures in signals. Principal
70 component analysis is used to extract information from high-dimensional datasets. Student Handbook 2020-2021
MSc
We then discuss Hilbert-Huang Transform to perform detailed time-frequency analysis
of signals. Attention is given to a variety of objectives, such as detection, noise removal,
compression, prediction, reconstruction and feature extraction. We discuss a few
cases from biomedical engineering, for instance involving ECG and EEG signals. The
techniques are explained for both 1D and 2D (images) signal processing. The subject
matter is clarified through exercises and examples involving various applications. In the
practical classes, students will apply the techniques discussed in the lectures using the
software package Matlab.
Knowledge and understanding: Students are able to explain fundamental concepts
of signal and image processing and their mathematical foundation. They are able to
1) describe various types of filters and their properties, 2) explain orthogonal wavelet
filter banks and describe their properties, 3) explain a construction scheme and elicit
a wavelet-based noise-filtering scheme, 4) explain principal component analysis
and empirical signal processing techniques and how they complement the other
techniques discussed.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are able to use the various
techniques discussed during the lectures to solve real-world problems, such as being
able to apply wavelet filtering and principal component analysis on various signals.
They are also able to analyse a signal by using Matlab, and independently interpret the
outcome of an analysis.
Making judgements: Students are able to assess what technique is suited for a signal
processing problem at hand, and to independently and critically look at a signal or
image, and understand if and what type of pre-processing is required.
Communication: Students are able to communicate signal and image processing
techniques and strategies.
Learning skills: Students are able to independently master signal and image processing
techniques, from classical signal processing techniques to more empirical techniques.
Study material: Discrete Wavelet Transformations: An Elementary Approach with
Applications, Patrick J. Van Fleet, Wiley, ISBN: 978-0-470-18311-3.
Recommended literature: Principal Component Analysis, Ian T. Jolliffe, Springer, ISBN13:
978-0387954424.
Exam: Written exam/Computer exam.
ECTS: 6
Stochastic Decision Making (Code: KEN4221)
Examiner: Dr. G. Schoenmakers
Prerequisites: Probability & Statistics.
Course Description: Any realistic model of a real-world phenomenon must take into
account the possibility of randomness. That is, more often than not, the quantities we
are interested in will not be predictable in advance but, rather, will exhibit an inherent
variation that should be taken into account by the model. Mathematically, this is
usually accomplished by allowing the model to be probabilistic in nature. In this course,
the following topics will be we discussed:
(1) Concepts of probability theory: Random variables, probability distribution functions,
density functions, conditional probability, expectation and variance.
(2) Finding probabilities, expectations and variances of random variables in complex
probabilistic experiments.
(3) Discrete and continuous time Markov chains and related stochastic processes like
random walks, branching processes, Poisson processes, Birth and Death processes, and
queueing theory.
(4) Markov decision problems. 71Student Handbook 2020-2021
MSc
Knowledge and understanding: In this course, the students acquire tools for modelling
complex processes involving randomness, providing a basis for originality in developing
and/or applying ideas in a research context.
Applying knowledge and understanding: When confronted with complex problems
that involve probabilistic experiments, students have the tools to create and analyse
appropriate models.
Making judgements: The students are able to analyse complex problems as stochastic
processes and solve them. Furthermore, students can find optimal solutions in decision
problems that are based on these stochastic processes.
Communication: The students will be able to communicate their conclusions and the
underlying rationale to expert and non-expert audiences.
Learning skills: The students have obtained the skills to study related material in a
largely autonomous manner.
Study material: Introduction to Probability Models by Sheldon M. Ross (9th or 10th ed.) +
Lecture notes that are provided via Student Portal.
Recommended literature: Probability: A Lively Introduction by Henk Tijms.
Exam: Written exam.
ECTS: 6
Period 1.2
Advanced Concepts in Machine Learning (Code: KEN4154)
Examiner: Dr. ir. K. Driessens
Desired Prior Knowledge: Machine Learning
Prerequisites: None.
Description: This course will introduce a number of advanced concepts in the field of
machine learning such as Support Vector Machines, Gaussian Processes, Recommender
Systems, Deep Neural Networks, Reinforcement learning, etc. All of these are approached
from the view that the right representation is imperative for machine learning solutions.
Additionally, different knowledge representation formats used in machine learning are
introduced. This course counts on the fact that basics of machine learning were
introduced in other courses so that it can focus on more recent developments and state
of the art in machine learning research. Labs and assignments will give the students the
opportunity to implement or work with these techniques and will require them to read
and understand published scientific papers from recent Machine Learning conferences.
Knowledge and understanding: Students can explain, construct and adapt powerful
machine learning techniques, most with a statistical background. Students recognise the
need for non-standard techniques and representations that can be used for complex/
structured data. They can explain the strengths and weaknesses of different machine
learning approaches.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to select, adapt and apply
a number of advanced machine learning approaches. They will be able to select the
correct representation for a machine-learning problem and to translate a machinelearning problem into a suited representational format.
Making judgements: Students will be able to judge which machine learning approach
and data-representation is best suited. They will also be able to comprehend and judge
machine-learning research.
Communication: Students will be able to relate different machine learning techniques to
each other and explain their working, benefits and disadvantages to non-experts. They
will also be able to discuss the need and use of structured representation with both
72 experts and non-experts. Student Handbook 2020-2021
MSc
Learning skills: Students will be able to relate information from different sources, and
read process and evaluate recent research developments in the field of machine learning.
Study material: Slides and collected notes and chapters from freely available books and
course notes.
Recommended literature: Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning - C.M. Bishop;
Bayesian Reasoning and Machine Learning - D. Barber; Gaussian Processes for Machine
Learning - C.E. Rasmussen & C. Williams; The Elements of Statistical Learning - T. Hastie et al.
Exam: Students are graded using a number of assignments (20%), a report and
presentation on a recent scientific paper or a machine learning application (20%) and a
written exam (60%).
ECTS: 6
Applications of Image and Video Processing (Code: KEN4244)
Examiner: Dr. A. Briassouli
Desired Prior Knowledge: Image and Video Processing, Calculus, Linear Algebra,
Machine Learning.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: Applications of image and video processing will be presented, and
connections to basic algorithms will be demonstrated. We will examine some of the
most popular and widespread applications, namely security, surveillance, medical,
traffic monitoring, astronomy, farming, culture. The methods used in these applications
will be analysed in class and common characteristics between them will be explained.
Students will be able to suggest further applications of interest to them and bring
relevant literature to the class.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will acquire a wide-ranging understanding
of the latest trends in image and video processing methods and how these are applied
in real world applications. They will obtain insights on common problems encountered
in these applications, and how they can be tackled through advanced image and video
processing algorithms.
Applying knowledge and understanding: The knowledge and understanding obtained
in this class will be demonstrated in mini projects based on State of the Art research.
Making judgements: Through the presentation of various applications of image and
video processing, students will be able to analyse problems in the real world, and
understand how to best address them.
Communication: Part of the class will include homework where students will carry
out a short literature review and implementation of mini projects on applications that
interest them. They will be taught how to communicate them succinctly and effectively,
maintaining a balance between overall understanding and technical depth.
Learning skills: Students will obtain a spherical comprehension of connections between
machine learning and image/video/signal processing, as well as their practical in a
wide range of applications in our daily life. They will be able to identify the methods
needed in different applications of image and video processing, propose a plan for
solving the corresponding problems, and justify it.
Study material: Lecture slides, selected papers.
- A Bovik, Handbook of Image and Video processing
Recommended literature:
- Rafael C. Gonzalez and Richard E. Woods, Digital Image Processing (3rd Edition),
Prentice Hall.
- Bovik (Ed.), The Essential Guide to Video Processing. Academic Press, 2009.
Exam: Mini projects (50%) and final exam (50%).
ECTS: 6
Student Handbook 2020-2021
73
MSc
Model Identification and Data Fitting (Code: KEN4242)
Examiner: Prof dr. ir. R.L.M. Peeters and dr. P. Bonizzi.
Tutor(s): None.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Basic knowledge of Matlab and some familiarity with linear
systems theory and transforms (such as Fourier and Laplace) is helpful. This course
offers a useful prior knowledge for the course Symbolic Computation and Control.
Prerequisites: Linear Algebra, Mathematical Modelling, Probability and Statistics.
Description: This course is devoted to the various practical and theoretical aspects
which involve the estimation (the identification) of a mathematical model within a
given model class, starting from a record of observed measurement data (input-output
data). First, we address distance measures, norms, and criterion functions. Then we
discuss the prediction error identification of linear regression models, with special
emphasis on the various interpretations of such models (deterministic, stochastic
with Gaussian white noise and maximum likelihood estimation, stochastic in a
Bayesian estimation context) and on numerical implementation aspects (recursion,
numerical complexity, numerical conditioning and square root filtering). Next, we
study identification within the important class of auto-regressive dynamical models,
to which the Levinson algorithm applies. Other related topics receiving attention
are identifiability, model reduction and model approximation. Some techniques
for the estimation of linear dynamical i/o-systems are illustrated with the system
identification toolbox in Matlab.
Knowledge and understanding: Students learn to recognize the various aspects that
play a key role in building a mathematical model from measurement data: the choice
of model class (and order), the choice of parameterization, the criterion of fit, the
model estimation method, the quality of the measurement data, and the validity of the
estimated model.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are able to 1) estimate models from
measurement data, particularly linear regression models and auto-regressive models,
2) to assess the quality of a (linear regression) model, and 3) assess whether a model is
identifiable.
Making judgements: Students are able to predict and judge the quality of models that
can be obtained from a record of measurement data.
Communication: Students have obtained the skills to motivate the choice of a
model class, the model order and an estimation method to identify a model from
measurement data, to interpret the identification outcomes and to explain all this to
specialists and non-specialists.
Learning skills: Students are able to read and interpret scientific literature on
model estimation and system identification, and to use Matlab and work out ideas
computationally.
Study material: Syllabus, provided electronically through the “My Courses” section of
the Student Portal.
Recommended literature:
• L. Ljung, System Identification: Theory for the User (2nd ed.), Prentice-Hall, 1999.
• T. Soderstrom and P. Stoica, System Identification, Prentice-Hall, 1989.
Exam: Written exam.
ECTS: 6
Student Handbook 2020-2021
74
MSc
Multi-Agent Systems (Code KEN4111)
Examiner: Prof. dr. G. Weiss.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Computer Science 1 and 2.
Description: Multi-agent systems are systems composed of multiple interacting
intelligent agents, where an agent is a computational entity such as a software
program or a robot that is situated in some environment and that to some extent
is able to act autonomously in order to achieve its design objectives. The field of
multi-agent systems has is origin in the late 1970s and today is an established and
vibrant topic in computer science. Multi-agent systems are an enabling technology
for applications that rely on distributed and parallel processing of data, information
and knowledge in complex – networked, open and large-scale – computing
environments. With advancing technological progress in inter-connectivity and
interoperability of computers and software such applications are becoming standard
in a variety of domains such as e-commerce, logistics, supply chain management,
telecommunication, health care, and manufacturing. The course covers important
conceptual, theoretical and practical foundations of multi-agent systems. Examples
of topics treated in the course are agent-agent communication, automated
negotiation and argumentation in cooperative and competitive settings, multi-agent
learning and planning, automated decision making based on mechanisms such as
voting and auctioning, and development and engineering of agent-based systems.
In the practical part of the course students have the opportunity to apply the learnt
multi-agent concepts, algorithms and methods.
Knowledge and understanding: The student is able to describe existing and design
novel agent-agent coordination mechanisms and interaction principles, and can
explain and analyse their strengths and shortcomings.
Applying knowledge and understanding: The student is be able to apply the gained
knowledge in concrete application scenarios and practical applications.
Making judgements: The student is be able to judge for a given problem whether and
in how far it is beneficial to use a multi-agent approach for its solution.
Communication: The student is able to motivate and explain benefits and
shortcomings of their usage in a given application, and thereby showing sufficient
understanding of multi-agent concepts.
Learning skills: The student is able to study autonomously multi-agent system
literature, including, in particular, literature describing new developments in the
methods and techniques covered in this course
Study material: Course slides; supplementary material to be announced.
Recommended literature:
• Gerhard Weiss (Ed.) (2013, 2nd edition): Multi-agent Systems. MIT Press.
• Mike Wooldridge (2009, 2nd edition): An Introduction to Multi Agent Systems,
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
• Yoav Shoham and Kevin Leyton-Brown (2009): Multi-agent Systems Algorithmic,
Game-Theoretic, and Logical Foundations”, Cambridge University Press.
Examination: Practical and reading assignments (30%) and written exam (70%)
ECTS: 6
Information Security (KEN4245) *with reservation
Examiner: Dr. A. Zarras
Tutor: Dr. A. Zarras
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Computer Science (1 & 2), Data Structures
and Algorithms, Software Engineering, Databases
Description: Information security is a specialized field in computer security that is
Student Handbook 2020-2021
75
MSc
designed to detect and prevent threats against digital information. As the Internet
evolves and computer networks become bigger and bigger, a data breach can have a
severe impact to an organization as sensitive and confidential data can be accessed
and disclosed in an unauthorized fashion. This illicit access to the data may involve
bad publicity and financial losses for the organization. This course will cover a wide
range of topics in information security, trying to strike balance between core concepts
and recent advancements. The main objectives of the course are to instil into the
students a heightened awareness of the need to protect data and resources from
disclosure as well as to guarantee the authenticity of data and messages. Some of the
topics we will explore include information assurance, access control, cryptography,
and authentication.
Knowledge and understanding: Students are able to understand the problems of
information security. In detail, they will understand what the threats they may face as
data scientists and how to effectively tackle them.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to demonstrate their
knowledge through graded assignments.
Making judgements: By understanding the fundamentals of information security
and by realizing their assignments, the students will be able to understand and avoid
common mistakes when operating with large and sensitive datasets.
Communication: The class will consist of lectures in which several information
security issues will be discussed. In parallel, there will be bonus assignments where
the students will have to solve some of the most important issues we discussed in
classroom. This way they will be able learn all the described principles in depth.
Learning skills: Students will be able to protect the integrity and authenticity of their
data as well as design and develop tools that enforce information security.
Exam: Assignments and Project
ECTS: 6
Period 1.3
Research Project AI 1 & DSDM 1 (Code KEN4131 & Code KEN4231)
Coordinator: Dr. ir. K. Driessens
Tutors: Dr. ir. K. Driessens & Dr. G. Schoenmakers
Desired Prior Knowledge: None.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: The research project takes place during the three periods of the semester.
Project topics are presented at the start of the semester and assigned to students
based on their preferences and availability. The emphasis in the first phase is on
initial study of the context set out for the project and the development of a project
plan. In the second period, the goal is to start modelling, prototyping and developing.
In period 3, the implementation, model and/or experiments set out in the project
plan has to be finished and reported on. At the end of period 1 and 2, a progress
presentation takes place. The project results in a project presentation, a project report
and possibly a public website and/or product.
Knowledge and understanding: Students get to know and possibly contribute to
state of the art methods within the fields of Artificial Intelligence and/or Data Science
for Decision Making to answer an open question.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Student write their own research plan in
coordination with a staff member (plus possibly outsiders) who act as clients with
an open question. Students with different backgrounds and from both masters work
together in teams to build and evaluate an answer to an open question. Students
Student Handbook 2020-2021
76
MSc
find, judge the suitability, apply, and evaluate state of the art techniques to answer
questions and construct applications in the field of Artificial Intelligence and Data
Science. Students apply the accumulated knowledge from other educational activities
in application specific areas
Making judgements: Students judge feasibility of tasks, attainability of goals, and the
amount of work involved.
Students think about the possible consequences of their work. Students evaluate state
of the art and the applicability and scope of research results.
Communication: Students will learn to:
(1) orally communicate and cooperate with peers
(2) orally report on progress and intermediate results to superiors
(3) orally negotiate and communicate with clients
(4) communicate their ideas in written form, both for an academic and a general
audience
(5) give effective presentations
Learning skills: Students increase their own level of knowledge in a specialised subdiscipline of the field of Artificial Intelligence and/or Data Science. Students perform
research into recent state of the art techniques. Students learn that the field of
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science are constantly evolving beyond what is taught
in class.
Study material: Slides provided at the end of joint information sessions. Literature
provided by the project supervisors.
Recommended literature: Justin Zobel (2004), Writing for Computer Science, Springer,
ISBN:1852338024
Exam: Phase 1: project plan + presentation (15%); Phase 2: layman’s website +
presentation (15%); Phase 3: Project report + presentation (70%)
ECTS: 6
Period 1.4
Algortihms for Big Data (Code: KEN4254)
Examiner: Dr. M. Mihalák
Desired Prior Knowledge: Discrete mathematics, algorithm design and analysis,
elementary discrete probability
Prerequisites: None
Description: The emergence of very large datasets poses new challenges for the
algorithm designer. For example, the data may not fit into the main memory anymore,
and caching from a hard-drive becomes a new bottleneck that needs to be addressed.
Similarly, algorithms with larger than linear running time take simply too long on very
large datasets. Moreover, simple sensory devices can observe large amount of data over
time, but cannot store all the observed information due to insufficient storage, and an
immediate decision of what to store and compute needs to be made. Classical
algorithmic techniques do not address these challenges, and a new algorithmic toolkit
needs to be developed. In this course, we will look at a number of algorithmic responses
to these problems, such as: algorithms with (sub-)linear running times, algorithms where
the data arrive as a stream, computational models where memory is organized
hierarchically (with larger storage units, such as hard-drives, being slower to access than
smaller, faster storage such as CPU cache memory). New programming paradigms and
models such as MapReduce/Hadoop will be discussed. We will also look at a number of
topics from classical algorithm design that have undiminished relevance in the era of big
data such as approximation algorithms and multivariate algorithmic analysis.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
77
MSc
Knowledge and understanding: Students will know, exemplified on selected topics,
what can be provably achieved when designing and analysing algorithms for very large
datasets, and will know some of the most successful state-of-the-art algorithmic
techniques for dealing with algorithmic challenges posed by large data sets.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to adjust and apply the
gained knowledge about algorithmic techniques to various algorithmic challenges of
handling large datasets.
Making judgements: Students will be able to categorize large-scale problems according
to their computational feasibility, and select the appropriate algorithmic response.
Communication: Students will be able to reason about computational problems and
algorithms addressing the problems in a clear, exact, and unambiguous way.
Learning skills: Additionally to the guiding material provided by the lecture, the
students will autonomously search, read, and study the details from various sources.
Study material: Will be provided throughout the lecture.
Recommended literature: None.
Exam: Written exam (80%) at the end of the course and graded exercises (20%)
throughout the course.
ECTS: 6
Building and Mining Knowledge Graphs (Code: KEN4256)
Examiner: Prof. dr. M. Dumontier and Dr. K. Moodley
Tutor(s): None.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Introduction to Computer Science
Prerequisites: None.
Description: Knowledge graphs are large-scale, machine-processable representations
of entities, their attributes, and their relationships. Knowledge graphs enable both
people and machines to explore, understand, and reuse information in a wide variety
of applications such as answering questions, finding relevant content, understanding
social structures, and making scientific discoveries. However, the sheer size and
complexity of these graphs present a formidable challenge particularly when mining
across different topic areas.
In this course, we will examine approaches to construct and use knowledge graphs
across a diverse set of applications using cutting-edge technologies such as
machine learning and deep learning, graph databases, ontologies and automated
reasoning, and other relevant techniques in the area of data mining and knowledge
representation.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to describe:
- The nature and attributes of a Knowledge Graph
- Examples of Knowledge Graphs;
- Representations for Knowledge Graphs
- Applications of Knowledge Graphs
- Advantages and disadvantages of Knowledge Graphs as compared to other
formalisms
- Approaches and challenges in constructing and maintaining Knowledge Graphs
- Approaches and challenges in finding, using and mining Knowledge graphs
- What FAIR is and how it relates to Knowledge Graphs
Ethical, legal & social issues around Knowledge Graphs
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to identify
requirements and steps to convert knowledge in traditional data formats to
Knowledge Graph formats. Students will also be able to implement such strategies.
Students will be able to query Knowledge Graphs (for instance using SPARQL query
Student Handbook 2020-2021
78
Students study in small groups, and the knowledge that is gained
is applied to projects linked to the curriculum. The results of these
projects are presented to teachers and fellow students.
MSc
language) to answer basic to intermediately advanced questions. Students will
be able to implement basic reasoning strategies on Knowledge Graphs to answer
intermediately advanced questions, which cannot be answered by SPARQL queries
alone. Students will be able to implement popular methods to integrate different
data sources by transferring them into a Knowledge Graph. Students will be able to
enrich existing Knowledge Graphs with missing information using basic predictive
algorithms. Students will be able to perform basic data quality assessment on
Knowledge Graphs. Students will be able to assess the degree of compliance that
Knowledge Graphs have with FAIR principles
Making judgements: Students will be able to select which tools are most suitable for
constructing, querying, visualising & reasoning with Knowledge Graphs. Students
will be able to differentiate between different types of Knowledge Graphs, according
to their representation, coverage and content. Students will be able to select which
Knowledge Graph is appropriate for answering a particular question. Students will be
able to diagnose incompleteness in a Knowledge Graph with respect to answering a
particular question. Students will be able to evaluate the data quality and FAIRness of
a Knowledge Graph.
Communication: Students will be able to explain the advantages of representing
information on the web in Knowledge Graphs. Students will be able to communicate
the steps required to convert information to a Knowledge Graph format. Students
will be able to communicate to non-experts the main content and representational
components of a Knowledge Graph. Students will be able to outline to non-experts the
steps required to answer a question by querying a Knowledge Graph.
Learning skills: Students will be able to reflect critically on the challenges and open
problems remaining in Knowledge Graphs research. Students will be able to formulate
and propose strategies to answer complex questions using Knowledge Graphs.
Students will be able to assess the feasibility of different combinations of methods for
answering questions using Knowledge Graphs.
Study material: Material will be provided during the course in the form of handouts.
Recommended literature: Aggarwal, C.C. and Wang, H. eds., (2010) Managing and
mining graph data (Vol. 40). New York: Springer. ISBN 978-1-4419-6045-0
Exam: Individual project for application of knowledge and two assignments to
demonstrate understanding of core concepts.
ECTS: 6
Computational Statistics (Code KEN4258)
Examiner: Dr. C. Seiler
Desired Prior Knowledge: Probability and Statistics
Prerequisites: None
Description: Complex and high dimensional data are abundant in academia and
industry. At the same time, computers are cheap and powerful. These developments
enable us to fit increasingly complex statistical models using computer intensive
methods. We will model and analyze both independent and dependent data
from real world problems. The course is hands-on; we will use Stan (platform for
statistical modelling and high-performance statistical computation) and R (statistical
programming language). Key topics: Statistical modelling, uncertainty quantification,
Markov chain Monte Carlo, bootstrap resampling, permutation tests, and causal inference.
Knowledge and understanding: Knowing a wide range of modern statistical models
and computational tools to draw inferences will provide the foundations for analyzing
complex data in academia and industry.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to:
Student Handbook 2020-2021
80
MSc
1. Tidy raw data obtained from large databases
2. Build complex statistical models
3. Choose computational tools to perform inference
4. Create reproducible analysis workflows to communicate results
Making judgements: In this course, we will discuss one of the most important aspects
of analyzing data: being skeptical of results and avoiding wishful thinking. This will be
accomplished by careful model checking and interpretation of the results.
Communication: Students will present their results using literate programming and
reproducible workflows.
Learning skills: Students will be able to understand, apply, and extend papers from
computational statistics journals.
Study material:
• McElreath (2015, second edition expected 2020), Statistical Rethinking
Recommended literature:
Selected chapters:
• Efron and Tibshirani (1993), An Introduction to the Bootstrap
• Hoff (2009), A First Course in Bayesian Statistical Methods
• Grolemund and Wickham (2017), R for Data Science
• Hernán and Robins (2019, forthcoming), Causal Inference
Exam: Written exam and assignments (focus on programming exercises, only few
selected mathematical exercises).
ECTS: 6
Autonomous Robotics Systems (Code: KEN4114)
Examiner: Dr. R. Möckel.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Discrete Mathematics, Linear Algebra, Probabilities and
Statistics, Data Structures and Algorithms, Machine Learning, Search Techniques.
Prerequisites: None
Description: Operating autonomously in unknown and dynamically changing
environments is a core challenge that all robotic systems must solve to work
successfully in industrial, public, and private areas. Currently popular systems that
must demonstrate such capabilities include self-driving cars, autonomously operating
drones, and personal robotic assistants. In this course, students obtain deep knowledge
in creating autonomous robotic systems that can operate in and manipulate unknown
and dynamically changing environments by autonomously planning, analysing,
mapping, and modelling of such environments. Students learn to approach these
challenging tasks through three main techniques: swarm intelligence, model-based
probabilistic frameworks, and (mostly) model-free techniques from artificial evolution
and machine learning.
Knowledge and understanding: Students gain a deep understanding of the challenges
in autonomous robotic systems and how these challenges are addressed in stateof-the-art systems. Students learn about and practise techniques for autonomous
mapping, localization, navigation, sensing, modelling robot motion, planning, and
decision-making. Through the course, students obtain in-depth knowledge and handson experience in a variety of algorithms and techniques from machine learning,
agent technology, and search techniques including Bayesian filters (like Kalman
Filters, Extended Kalman Filters, Histogram Filters, and Particle Filters), artificial neural
networks, evolutionary algorithms, and swarm intelligence.
Applying knowledge and understanding: After successful completion of the course,
students will have obtained in-depth knowledge to understand, adapt, apply, and
combine a number of advanced control approaches to create the next generation of
Student Handbook 2020-2021
81
MSc
autonomous robotics systems. Students obtain the ability to select from a variety
of available tools feasible solutions for the complex and rather ill defined problem
domains of autonomous robotic systems and to predict the resulting consequences
of their choices. Furthermore, students learn how to choose, apply, formulate,
and validate models of autonomous robotic systems and of appropriate control
techniques from artificial intelligence for these systems.
Making judgements: Students will be able to comprehend and to critically judge
scientific publications on autonomous systems, artificial evolution, and swarm
intelligence. From this literature, students are able to search for and to critically
process information to solve given ill-defined but in practise highly relevant problems
in autonomous systems. Students are able to critically discuss social, economic, and
ethical consequences of artificial intelligence and autonomous decision-making.
Communication: Students learn to critically discuss challenges and professional
solutions in autonomous robotic applications with both experts and non-experts.
Learning skills: The course prepares students to work on robotic applications
in professional research and business environments. Students will be able to
autonomously acquire new skills and knowledge to develop, program, analyse, and
apply advanced techniques to a wide variety of problems.
Study material: Thrun et al. (2005), Probabilistic Robotics, The MIT press, ISBN-13: 978-
0262201629.
Lecture material and publications provided during the lecture.
Recommended literature:
• Floreano and Nolfi (2000), Evolutionary Robotics, The MIT press. ISBN-13: 978-
0262640565.
• Dario Floreano und Claudio Mattiussi (2008), Bio-Inspired Artificial Intelligence:
Theories, Methods, and Technologies, ISBN-13: 978-0262062718
Examination: The final course grade is 80% of the final written “closed-book” exam
grade plus 20% of the practical group assignments grades
ECTS: 6
Dynamic Game Theory (Code KEN4251)
Examiner: Prof. Dr. F. Thuijsman and Dr. K. Stankova.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Students are expected to be familiar with basic concepts
from linear algebra, calculus, Markov chains and differential equations.
Prerequisites: None
Description: The course will focus on non-cooperative games and on dynamic games
in the following order: matrix and bimatrix games, repeated games, Stackelberg
games, differential games, specific models of stochastic games, evolutionary games.
These are games in which the players are acting as strategic decision makers, who
cannot make binding agreements to achieve their goals. Instead, threats may be
applied to establish stable outcomes. Besides, relations with population dynamics
and with “learning” will be examined. Several examples will be taken from biological
settings. Knowledge and understanding Students are able to recognize and classify
the main types of dynamic games, i.e. repeated games, stochastic games, Stackelberg
games, differential games, and evolutionary games and formulate the main solution
concepts value, optimal strategies, Nash- and Stackelberg equilibrium
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students are able calculate solutions of the
different types of dynamic games
Making judgements: Students are able to explain advantages and disadvantages of
different solution concepts. They are able to judge correctness of solutions presented
Communication: Students are able to explain and defend correctness of their
Student Handbook 2020-2021
82
MSc
solutions
Learning skills: By the end of the course, students will be able to autonomously and
critically reflect upon the pros and cons of different types of games for modelling
competition and cooperation. This includes considerations on the computational
aspects with respect to different solution concepts.
Study material: Handouts will be provided.
Recommended literature: none.
Exam: There will be a closed book written exam at the end of the course.
ECTS: 6
Advanced Natural Language Processing (Code: KEN4259)
Examiner: Dr. J. Niehues
Desired Prior Knowledge: Advanced Concepts in Machine Learning
Prerequisites: none
Description: How do I say, “Where is the next Italian restaurant” in Dutch? Can I get
a summary of today’s lecture? When were artificial neural networks developed?
Computers able to answer these questions are a long-time dream of humankind and
currently, we see first programs to solve these problems. This course will provide the
skills and knowledge to develop state-of-the-art (SOTA) solutions for these natural
language processing (NLP) tasks.
After a short introduction to traditional statistical approaches to NLP, the course will
focus on deep learning techniques to solve these problems. In the first part of the
course, we will investigate methods to model sequence labeling tasks like Named Entity
recognition or Part-of-speech techniques. The second part of the lecture will focus on
sequence-to-sequence models, a very powerful model to solve many NLP tasks like
machine translation, summarization and question answering.
In this course, major challenges when building the systems will be address: representing
words in neural networks, neural network architectures to model language, methods to
train complex models and algorithms to find the most probable output.
Knowledge and understanding: Student will be taught state-of-the-art deep learning
techniques for natural language processing, especially sequence labeling and
sequence-to-sequence models. They will learn techniques to address the major
challenges when building a natural language processing tool.
Appling Knowledge and understanding: The achievements in deep learning have
significantly improved the quality of state-of-the-art methods for natural language
processing. With the knowledge acquired in the course, students will be able to build
SOTA solutions.
Making judgements: Students will be able to analyze the specific challenges of a task
in NLP. Based on the gather knowledge on different ways to model tasks they are able
to select and implement a fitting model to solve the task.
Communication: Through small research projects, students will be enabled to
communicate their findings and explain the rationale behind their choices in deep
learning techniques for natural language processing.
Learning skills: After successful completion of the course, students will be able to develop
natural language processing tools and perform research on new ideas in the field.
Study material: Mostly based on the lecture notes and the provided material including
recent papers published in this field.
Recommended literature: Papers published in top international conferences and
journals in machine learning field.
Exam: Group-assignment (30%), final exam (70%)
ECTS: 6
Student Handbook 2020-2021
83
MSc
Period 1.5
Computer Vision (Code: KEN4255)
Examiner: Dr. M. Popa and Dr. S. Asteriadis
Desired Prior Knowledge: Basic knowledge of Matlab, linear algebra and machine
learning. This course offers the basics on image processing although prior knowledge
is also a plus.
Description: Can we make machines look, understand and interpret the world around
them? Can we make cars that can autonomously navigate in the world, robots that
can recognize and grasp objects and, ultimately, recognize humans and communicate
with them? How do search engines index and retrieve billions of images? This course
will provide the knowledge and skills that are fundamental to core vision tasks of
one of the fastest growing fields in academia and industry: visual computing. Topics
include introduction to fundamental problems of computer vision, mathematical
models and computational methodologies for their solution, implementation of reallife applications and experimentation with various techniques in the field of scene
analysis and understanding. In particular, after a recap of basic image analysis tools
(enhancement, restoration, color spaces, edge detection), students will learn about
feature detectors and trackers, fitting, image geometric transformation and mosaicing
techniques, texture analysis and classification using unsupervised techniques,
object classification and face recognition, camera models, epipolar geometry and 3D
reconstruction from 2D views.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to apply the most suitable
techniques for image pre-processing (e.g. enhancement, restoration), feature
extraction, texture analysis, perspective geometry, camera models and topics on object
recognition. Students will be able to identify the most suitable techniques in a series of
visual computing problems
Applying knowledge and understanding: The students will be able to choose and/
or construct solutions in a variety of professional/vocational contexts requiring
image processing and computer vision (robotics, manufacturing, AI, web applications,
surveillance). They will be able to build and assess methodologies for handling realworld complex problems in computer vision, making use of pre-existing data for
training their models.
Making judgements: The students will be able to choose and combine the right
methods to tackle real-world computer vision problems, captured in real-life settings
and having no obvious solutions. They will be able to propose and build techniques
combining computer vision methods along with machine learning instruments for
scene understanding and object recognition.
Communication: Through small research projects, students will be able to
communicate their findings and explain the rationale behind their choices in computer
vision techniques for image/video analysis.
Learning skills: After successful completion of the course, students will be able to
analyse images and videos and retrieve or process content in order to derive useful
information, applicable in a variety of domains (e.g. satellite imagery, surveillance,
robotics, medical imaging)
Study material:
• Lecture slides and provided notes
• Computer vision: algorithms and applications”. Szeliski, Richard. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2010 (available online)
• Computer Vision: A Modern Approach, 2nd Edition. David A. Forsyth.
Recommended literature: Digital Image Processing”, Rafael C. Gonzalez & Richard E.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
84
MSc
Woods, Addison-Wesley, 2002 / Digital Image Processing using MATLAB. 2° Edition
Rafael C. Gonzalez, Richard E. Woods, Steven L. Eddins. Gatesmark Publishing
Exam: Projects (33% individual assignments – 17% group-based assignments) and final
exam (50%).
ECTS: 6
Information Retrieval and Text Mining (Code: KEN4153)
Examiner: Prof dr. ir J.C. Scholtes
Tutor(s): None.
Desired Prior Knowledge: None.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: Text mining refers generally to the process of extracting interesting and
non-trivial information and knowledge from unstructured text. Text mining
encompasses several computer science disciplines with a strong orientation towards
artificial intelligence in general, including but not limited to information retrieval
(building a search engine), statistical pattern recognition, natural language processing,
information extraction and different methods of machine learning, clustering and
ultimately data visualization. An important difference with standard information
retrieval (search) techniques is that they require a user to know what he or she is
looking for, while text mining attempts to discover information in a pattern that is not
known beforehand. This is very relevant, for example, in criminal investigations, legal
discovery, (business) intelligence, sentiment- & emotion mining or clinical research.
Knowledge and understanding: The student will be able to select, understand and
apply different phases and methods used to create successful Information Retrieval
and Text Mining applications. In addition, the student learns to evaluate the quality of
such methods according to best-practice standards as used in the field.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to recognize
applications of text mining and information retrieval in different domains such as legal
services, medical research, regulatory oversight, compliance, humanities, and customer
services. After the course, the student can formulate an opinion or course of action
when dealing with text-based KE-problems based on incomplete, limited and in part
unreliable information. After the course, students can apply their knowledge and
understanding in a manner that shows a scientific approach to their work or vocation.
They are able to handle complex and ill-defined text-based problems for which it is not
a priori known if there is an appropriate solution, they know how to acquire the
necessary information to solve the sub-problems involved, and they know how to
proceed with problems for which there is no standard or reliable route to the solution.
Making judgements: Upon completion of the course, students are able to recommend
the most appropriate methods from the fields of text mining and information retrieval
when confronted with KE-problems involving textual and other forms of unstructured
data.
Communication: Students are able to communicate the (dis)advantages of several
methods from the field of text mining and information retrieval to both an audience of
non-experts.
Learning skills: After the course, the student has developed those learning skills that
are necessary for a successful further career in text mining or information retrieval at
the highest professional level. The student will be able to continue to develop their
text-mining and information retrieval skills. The student is able to detect missing
knowledge and abilities and to deal with them appropriately by finding and consulting
resources that can help them to fill the gaps and new developments.
Study material: A syllabus and copies of the course slides will be used.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
85
MSc
Recommended literature: Introduction to Information Retrieval. Christopher D.
Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan and Hinrich Schütze. Cambridge University Press,
2008. In bookstore and online: http://informationretrieval.org and Feldman, R., and
Sanger, J. (2006). The Text Mining Handbook: Advanced Approaches in Analyzing
Unstructured Data. Cambridge University Press
Exam: The result of the practical exercises contributes 30% to the final examination
of the course. The other 70% is determined by the theoretical exam. The theoretical
exam is open book. For the practical exercise, students can select a research topic and
a text corpus from the provided list (or another relevant open source collection) and
implement a number of relevant text-mining operations by using open source textmining tools. A number of relevant pre-processing operations, text mining operations,
and visualizations have to be implemented. Proposals of work will have to be within
one week after the start of the course, after which they will be reviewed. After
approval, the students can start the implementation of their proposals. At the end of
the course, each student or group shall write a report on the research and the results
and the results shall be presented to the rest of the class.
ECTS: 6
Deep Learning (Code KEN4257)
Examiner: Dr. S. Mehrkanoon
Desired Prior Knowledge: Machine Learning
Prerequisite: Advanced Concepts of Machine Learning
Description: Conventional machine learning techniques were limited in processing
data in their raw forms and many domain experts were required in transforming raw
data into meaningful features or representations. Deep Learning techniques have
revolutionized many application domains ranging from auditory to vision signal
processing. In this course, we will study various concepts in deep architectures using
both artificial neural networks as well as kernel-based models. Several deep learning
models such as convolutional neural networks, auto-encoders, generative adversarial
networks and their variants among other state-of-the-art models will be covered in
depth. We will further study different types of deep architectures used for domain
adaptation problems where one is encountered with heterogeneous datasets as well
as multi-modal datasets. The regularization and optimization methods used in deep
learning framework will be discussed. Introduction to open-source deep learning
platforms will be given. This course will be equipped with a practical component, and
students are expected to write their own deep learning code and test its performance
on various problems. In addition they are strongly encouraged to participate in miniprojects (in a group or individual) targeting a conference paper.
Knowledge and understanding: By the end of this course, students will be able
to explain aspects related to learning the model parameters, overfitting, model
architecture, relation between neurons, layers among others. In addition, they will be
able to implement the methodologies using deep learning libraries. The learned deep
machine learning models combined with mathematics and optimization behind the
models will enable students to gain more insight on capabilities of these models.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to apply the abovementioned deep learning skills, which they have acquired in their domain of interest.
Explore and select new research directions and discover new things by driving new
models.
Making judgements: Students will be able to implement and apply deep learning
models for analyzing datasets in different tasks. They will be able to determine the
best model for the given task.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
86
MSc
Communication: Students will be able to discuss deep learning models and their results
with scientists, engineers and both expert and non-expert.
Learning skills: By the end of the course, students will be able to autonomously follow
up the recent trends in deep learning which are beyond the scope of the provided
course materials.
Study material: Course notes and other information made available.
Recommended literature:
• Ian Goodfellow and Yoshua Bengio and Aaron Courville (2016). Deep Learning, MIT
Press.
• Research Papers Published in high ranked journals and conferences.
Exam: Grades of the assignments (20%) + Grade for paper review, presentation (20%)
+ Grade for the exam (60%). Bonus: If students can come up with novel approaches to
solve the given assignments and after consulting the results with me they can write a
manuscript describing their findings and submit it to a conference for review can get
additional 10% bonus on the assignments which could help them for the final grades.
This bonus does not depend on the acceptance of the manuscript by the conference.
ECTS: 6
Planning and Scheduling (Code KEN4253)
Examiner: Dr. M. Mihalák
Desired Prior Knowledge: Data Structures & Algorithms. Discrete Mathematics.
Graph Theory
Prerequisites: None
Description: In many real-world processes, particularly in industrial processes and
logistics, decisions need to be taken about the time of the completion of (sub)tasks,
and the decision about what production machines complete the tasks. There are
often constraints on the order in which tasks, or ‘jobs’ can be performed, and there are
usually capacity constraints of the machines. This leads to natural, industrially critical
optimization problems. For example, a company might choose to buy many machines
to process jobs, but then there is a risk that the machines will be underused, which is
economically inefficient. On the other hand, too few machines, or an inappropriate
ordering of tasks, may lead to machines spending a significant amount of time
standing idle, waiting for the output of other machines, which are overcrowded with
tasks. In this course, we look at various mathematical models and techniques for
optimizing planning and scheduling problems, subject to different optimality criteria.
We will discuss, among others, single-machine models, parallel-machine models,
job-shop models, and algorithms for planning and scheduling (exact, approximate,
heuristic) and we also touch upon the computational complexity (distinguishing
between ‘easy’ and ‘difficult’ problems) of the underlying problems. Last but not least,
we will also introduce integer linear programming as a uniform and generic tool to
model and solve planning and scheduling problems.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will possess the mathematical and
algorithmic tools to model and solve planning/scheduling problems. Students will be
able to recognize real-world problems in the unified theory and established language
of planning and scheduling.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to apply the new
techniques to various problems arising in real-world applications. Students will be able
to deploy the standard algorithmic techniques, and be able to design new algorithmic
solutions, and to argue about their performance properties.
Making judgements: Students will understand under which circumstances different
planning/scheduling problems are computationally tractable, and will judge
Student Handbook 2020-2021
87
MSc
algorithmic technique can be used to exactly or approximately solve these problems.
Communication: Students will be able to analytically argue about correctness of the
used algorithmic approaches. Students will be able to explain modelling approaches
to planning and scheduling problems in the language of the theory of planning and
scheduling.
Learning skills: Students will enhance their study skills such as time management,
effective reading, critical thinking and reading, exact and unambiguous writing and
formulating of ideas and statements, and reflection on marked work. Along the way,
students will improve general learning skills such as self-motivation, careful listening
and giving instructions, and openness to new knowledge. Students will also be
exposed to autonomous self-study.
Study material: Appropriate study material will be provided throughout the course.
Recommended literature: None
Exam: Written exam (80%) at the end of the course, and graded exercises (20%)
throughout the course.
ECTS: 6
Symbolic Computation and Control (Code:KEN4252)
Examiner: Prof dr. ir. R.L.M. Peeters.
Desired Prior Knowledge: Linear Algebra, Calculus, Mathematical Modelling.
Course Description: This course consists of two interrelated parts. In the first part, we
focus on basic techniques for the digital control of linear dynamical systems using
feedback. We start by addressing system stability and we discuss the technique of
pole placement by state feedback to solve the regulation problem. Then we introduce
state observers to solve the regulation problem by output feedback. Next, we extend
our scope to tracking problems. This involves the design of additional dynamics to
characterize the relevant class of reference signals, which are then integrated with
the earlier set-up for output feedback. Finally, we discuss the classical topic of optimal
control, which can be employed to avoid using prototype systems for pole placement,
and which allows the user to design a feedback law by trading off the cost involved in
generating large inputs against the achieved tracking accuracy. In the second part, we
address computational issues, related to the field of systems and control. Classically,
computers have been designed primarily to perform approximate numerical
arithmetic. Modern software packages for mathematical computation, such as
Maple and Mathematica, allow one to perform exact and symbolic computation
too. We shall explore this new area. It is demonstrated how speed, efficiency and
memory usage considerations often lead to surprising and fundamentally different
algorithmic solutions in a symbolic or exact context. Applications and examples
involve stability of linear systems, model approximation, and linear matrix equations
with free parameters. Practical classes serve to demonstrate the techniques and to
make the student familiar with exact and symbolic computation.
Knowledge and understanding: Students familiarize themselves with state and
output feedback to achieve control of dynamical systems. Concretely, they learn
to (mathematically) build a basic stabilizing feedback controller for a linear inputoutput dynamical system, using a combination of different design techniques.
Students learn methods for exact numerical and symbolic computation, as used in
algebraic computation with unspecified parameters. They also learn in which ways
these are different from the more commonly used approximate numerical (floatingpoint) methods: in terms of accuracy, speed (complexity), and memory usage.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to construct and
implement, for a given linear dynamical input-output system: (a) stabilizing state
feedback, (b) full state observer, and (c) additional dynamics to perform tracking of a
Student Handbook 2020-2021
88
MSc
specified output trajectory. They will also be able to assess the quality of a controller,
regarding an optimal control LQ criterion, and in view of the desired settling time
and the trajectory approximation. Students will be able to determine the stability of
a given linear dynamical system in an exact and/or symbolic algebraic way. They will
also able to efficiently solve linear systems of (matrix) equations involving symbolic
parameters, avoiding pitfalls, which arise from techniques from approximate
numerical computation.
Making judgements: Students will be able to judge the quality of a feedback design
for stabilization (regulation) or tracking. Students will be able to indicate which
exact and symbolic computation methods will and will not be useful for a given
parameterized problem, regarding speed and memory usage.
Communication: Students will be able to motivate the design of a feedback controller,
the construction of a trajectory approximation, the design of a full state observer, and
the implementation choices of the weights in LQ-design. They will be able to explain
the concept of feedback in the area of control. Students can adequately discuss speed
and efficiency properties of an algorithm (approximate numerical, exact numerical,
symbolic) to specialists and non-specialists.
Learning skills: Students will be able to read and interpret basic scientific literature
on control theory and on numerical and symbolic computation. They can use Matlab
and the Control Toolbox and work out ideas computationally. Students can use
some of the exact and symbolic functionality of Mathematica and work out ideas
computationally.
Study material: Syllabus, provided on eleUM. Handouts.
Recommended literature: Richard J. Vaccaro, Digital Control - A State-Space Approach,
McGraw-Hill International Editions, 1995. ISBN 0-07-066781-0.
Exam: Written exam by computer in two parts, each having a weight of 50% on the
final grade: one midterm take-home exam with Matlab on part 1 (control), one final
classroom exam with Mathematica on part 2 (symbolic computation). The resit exam
is on both parts of the course in a classroom setting.
ECTS: 6
Algorithms for Data Visualization (Code:KEN4213)
Examiner: Dr. S. Chaplick
Desired Prior Knowledge: Data Structures & Algorithms. Discrete Mathematics. Graph
Theory
Prerequisites: None
Description: In our modern world, we are surrounded by data sets in all shapes and
sizes. An essential aspect of working with data sets (whether relational, quantitative,
etc.) is how they should be presented/visualized. Even for a single data set, different
visualizations can be better for different tasks. Moreover, the scale of the data sets
often restricts the options available when designing how it should be presented
(including the choice of algorithm and the appropriateness of preprocessing/
cleaning the data to a “visualizable” scale). This course will provide an overview of
the basic theoretical and practical aspects of information visualization with a focus
on algorithmic approaches. It includes how to visualize relational data (e.g., graphs/
networks) and standard approaches for quantitative data sets such as, projecting
high dimensional data to lower dimensions for visualisation (e.g., multi-dimensional
scaling and t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding, etc.). We will also cover
some aspects of augmenting visualizations with meta-data such as, labeling nodes/
points, weighting relations, and information regarding grouping/clustering.
Knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to identify and recount the
Student Handbook 2020-2021
89
MSc
common approaches used in information and network visualization. For example,
students will be able to identify visualization techniques used in systems/media.
Moreover, students have a sufficient understanding of such these approaches to
implement them.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Students will be able to adapt existing
and design new visualization approaches to various problems arising in realworld applications. Students will be able to design efficient implementations of
such approaches via standard algorithmic techniques, and to argue about their
performance.
Making judgements: Students will be able to evaluate under which circumstances
different visualization techniques are viable, and to select an appropriate technique to
be applied depending on the setting/task.
Communication: Students will be able to analytically argue about correctness and
performance of the used algorithmic approaches. Students will be able to explain and
compare different visualization approaches.
Learning skills: By the end of the course, students will be able to autonomously
evaluate a new visualization technique as it relates to standard approaches. For
example, students will also be able to read and discuss visualization literature beyond
the scope of this course (as showcased via a short presentation during the course).
Study material: Appropriate study material will be provided throughout the course.
Recommended literature:
- Tamara Munzner, Visualization Analysis and Design, 2014, ISBN 978-1466508910
- Giuseppe Di Battista, Peter Eades, Roberto Tamassia and Ioannis G. Tollis. Graph
Drawing: Algorithms for the Visualization of Graphs. Prentice Hall, 1999.
- Michael Kaufmann and Dorothea Wagner (Hrsg.). Drawing Graphs: Methods and
Models. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Volume 2025. Springer-Verlag 2001.
Exam: Written exam (80%) at the end of the course, graded exercises (10%)
throughout the course, and a short presentation (10%).
ECTS: 6
Period 1.6
Research Project AI 2 & DSDM 2 (Code KEN4131 & Code KEN4231)
Coordinator: Dr. ir. K. Driessens
Tutors: Dr. ir. K. Driessens & Dr. G. Schoenmakers
Desired Prior Knowledge: None.
Prerequisites: None.
Description: The research project takes place during the three periods of the semester.
Project topics are presented at the start of the semester and assigned to students
based on their preferences and availability. The emphasis in the first phase is on initial
study of the context set out for the project and the development of a project plan. In
the second period, the goal is to start modelling, prototyping and developing. In period
3, the implementation, model and/or experiments set out in the project plan has to be
finished and reported on. At the end of period 1 and 2, a progress presentation takes
place. The project results in a project presentation, a project report and possibly a
public website and/or product.
Knowledge and understanding: Students get to know and possibly contribute to state
of the art methods within the fields of Artificial Intelligence and/or Data Science for
Decision Making to answer an open question.
Applying knowledge and understanding: Student write their own research plan in
coordination with a staff member (plus possibly outsiders) who act as clients with an
Student Handbook 2020-2021
90
MSc
open question. Students with different backgrounds and from both masters work
together in teams to build and evaluate an answer to an open question. Students
find, judge the suitability, apply, and evaluate state of the art techniques to answer
questions and construct applications in the field of Artificial Intelligence and Data
Science. Students apply the accumulated knowledge from other educational activities
in application specific areas
Making judgements: Students judge feasibility of tasks, attainability of goals, and the
amount of work involved.
Students think about the possible consequences of their work. Students evaluate
state of the art and the applicability and scope of research results.
Communication: Students will learn to:
(1) orally communicate and cooperate with peers
(2) orally report on progress and intermediate results to superiors
(3) orally negotiate and communicate with clients
(4) communicate their ideas in written form, both for an academic and a general
audience
(5) give effective presentations
Learning skills: Students increase their own level of knowledge in a specialised subdiscipline of the field of Artificial Intelligence and/or Data Science. Students perform
research into recent state of the art techniques. Students learn that the field of
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science are constantly evolving beyond what is taught
in class
Study material: Slides provided at the end of joint information sessions.
Literature provided by the project supervisors.
Recommended literature: Justin Zobel (2004), Writing for Computer Science, Springer,
ISBN:1852338024
Exam: Phase 1: project plan + presentation (15%); Phase 2: layman’s website +
presentation (15%); Phase 3: Project report + presentation (70%)
ECTS: 6
Period 2.1, 2.2, 2.3
Electives
Period 1, 2 and 3 of year two of the master’s program consist of electives to be
chosen by the student. This optional program can be assembled at your own choice,
but within academic significance and relevance to your master’s track. The Board
of Examiners has to evaluate and approve the chosen combination of electives. The
electives consist of the following options to choose from: courses to be followed at
DKE, at other UM Master programmes, at another university, a research project, an
internship, a study abroad abroad at a foreign university, or a project. Note that you
have obtained at least 40 ECTS of course year 1 in order to enter the second year of the
programme.
Electives at Maastricht University outside DKE
It is possible to take electives at other relevant master’s programmes at Maastricht
University for at most 13 ECTS in the second year of the programme. The following
courses below will be automatically approved by the Board of Examiners of DKE. You
should apply through the Special Course Approval procedure via the My UM Portal.
Note that they may have limited capacity.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
91
MSc
School of Business and Economics
Social Choice Theory (ECB4005) 6.5 ECTS
Supply Chain Operations (EBC4016) 6.5 ECTS
Negotiation and Allocations (EBC4193) 6.5 ECTS
Intellectual Property Rights in a Digital Economy (EBC4026) 6.5 ECTS
High-Dimensional Econometric Methods for Big Data (EBC4218) 6.5 ECTS
Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience
Besides complying that you have passed 40 ECTS, for taking these electives at FPN
you should have passed “Advanced Concepts in Machine Learning” and “Autonomous
Robotic Systems” at DKE.
Auditory and Higher Order Language Processing (PSY4051) 4 ECTS
Perception and Attention (PSY4052) 4 ECTS
Sensorimotor Processing (PSY4055) 4 ECTS
Exam: Depends on content of the elective program.
ECTS: 30
Period 2.4, 2.5, 2.6
Master’s thesis AI & DSDM (Code: KEN4160 & Code: KEN4260)
The Master’s Artificial Intelligence and Data Science for Decision Making will be
completed by writing a master’s thesis. The thesis is produced individually and is the
result of a master’s research project that runs during the second semester of year 2
of the master’s programme. In the first phase, the emphasis is on self-study, subject
determination, planning and some preliminary research. Then the actual research is
started. The final phase is used to finalize the master’s thesis. The master’s project is
completed by a presentation of the results. The master’s project will be supervised by
one of the senior researchers.
Exam: Master’s thesis and presentation.
ECTS: 30
* Note that when you enrol in February, you follow your electives in period 2.4, 2.5 and
2.6 and work on your master’s thesis in period 2.1, 2.2, 2.3.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
92
MSc
2.4.3 Master’s thesis Artificial Intelligence and Data Science for
Decision Making
At the end of the master’s study, each student has to write a thesis. This thesis has to
be written and presented individually, and accompanied by relevant attachments and
software. In order to start working on the thesis, a student needs to have obtained at
least 60 ECTS (among which are 40 credits of the first year).
General procedure
The process of writing a master’s thesis consists of 6 phases. It is scheduled in the last
semester of the master’s study. The time frame given below is an indication for these
phases.
Phase 1: Topic selection
At the end of the previous semester, the students are informed of the main directions of
research in the three research groups at the DKE department. Based on this information,
students acquire more information about specific possibilities in the areas by means of
individual discussions with relevant researchers available. These discussions take place
upon the initiative of the student.
Phase 2: Thesis Research Plan
At the start of the first period of the semester, each student must have chosen a thesis
topic and a principal thesis supervisor. The student creates a thesis research plan, which
is to be signed by the student and the thesis supervisor, and then handed over to the
master’s thesis coordinator. The plan is sent to the Board of Examiners for approval. In
the fourth week of period 1, the students present their research topics during a 10
minutes presentation in front of the DKE staff members and fellow students.
Phase 3: Research
During the second period of the semester, the student carries out his/her own research.
This research process will be guided by the thesis supervisor through a series of
frequent appointments, preferably on a weekly basis. In the fourth week of period 2,
the student is invited to present the first research achievements, with audience the
DKE staff members and fellow students.
Phase 4: Writing
At the end of the second period, the research is finished and the first version of the
thesis is submitted to the thesis supervisor. The thesis supervisor, as well as a second
assessor, will evaluate the thesis and provide a first reaction within one week. The
second and final submission will take place during the second week of the third period.
Phase 5: Preparation for presentation
In the third week of the third period, the student prepares a final presentation of the
thesis research. This individual presentation will have a maximum length of 30
minutes, followed by 15 minutes of discussion.
Phase 6: Presentation
The master’s thesis will be presented in the last week. Two dates are reserved for that
occasion. The presentation is open for all students and employees of the bachelor’s
Data Science and Artificial Intelligence and master’s programmes, Artificial Intelligence
Student Handbook 2020-2021
93
and Data Science for Decision Making and anyone else who was involved in the thesis
research. The final decision on the grade for the master’s thesis will be made shortly
after the presentation.
Requirements and assessment
For the master’s thesis research, every student has to conduct a short scientific
research. This can be an empirical or a theoretical research. The topic is open, as long as
it fits into the field of the master’s program. DKE staff will briefly introduce their main
areas of research, but students are encouraged to propose a research topic themselves.
The topic and the research question have first to be approved by the thesis supervisor.
To achieve this, the student will create a master’s thesis research plan using the form
provided by the Board of Examiners that contains amongst others:
• Date;
• Name and student number;
• Name of the thesis supervisor(s) and examiners;
• Title of the master’s thesis, start and end date of the thesis research;
• Short description of the problem statement and research questions;
• A list of the main research activities, with a time schedule.
This plan will be signed by the student and the thesis supervisor and prospective
examiners and then handed in to the Board of Examiners for the formal approval. It is
possible to execute the master’s thesis research as an external training period. This
should be well defined in the master’s research plan. In this case, the plan should also
include the name of the company, the name of the external supervisor, the size of the
project and any agreements about payment and confidentiality. The plan should also
be signed by the external supervisor.
The research needs to be original in such a way that the thesis supervisor is convinced
that this research has not been done before. The research also needs enough depth and
still it must be possible to finish it in the set amount of time. It is possible for multiple
students to cooperate in a research project as long as it is clear who did what.
Moreover, every student has to write their own thesis reflecting his part of the research.
The assessment will be based on the contents and form of the thesis and the
presentation of this thesis.
Content aspects
The thesis describes the problem statement, research questions, approach and results of
the research. This has to be done in a clear, structured and scientific manner. This includes:
• a clear introduction in which the problem statement and research questions are
presented;
• the master’s student shows proper analysis of complex issues in a new context and is
able to formulate a proper problem statement;
• a clear conclusion, based solely on the already used thought out principles and derived
results;
• a clear line is shown between problem statements, approach, methods and the derived
results;
• a motivation of the followed approach, reflecting on standard methods and their
presuppositions,
• an adequate description of the followed approach;
• a purposeful and systematic way of collecting data;
• an honest, clear and concise description of the derived results, if necessary using tables;
Student Handbook 2020-2021
94MSc
MSc
• an analysis and discussion of the results;
• the usage of relevant and recent literature for the reasoning in the thesis.
• the correct usage of references.
Design aspects
Correct scientific references have to be used. Images and tables are accompanied by an
index and caption. Mathematical formula, definitions, etc. have to be properly designed
and numbered. The start and end of mathematical formulae have to be properly defined.
Language aspects
The thesis has to be written in English, considering correct spelling, syntactical
structure of sentences and structure of content in paragraphs. The target audience
consists of fellow master’s students and lecturers. Any jargon and/or abbreviations
have to be explained unless they are common knowledge for this audience.
Citations
It is allowed to use several short citations. These citations have to be clearly referenced
and have to be typographically distinguishable (that is, citations are placed in quotes).
Non-allowed citations or missing references will result in a non-pass.
2.5 Courses at other faculties or universities
If a student from DKE would like to participate in courses at other faculties or other
universities, approval from the Board of Examiners is needed in advance. For more
information, please contact the Student Affairs Office or visit the study advisor.
2.6 DKE Honours Programme
DKE offers its talented and top-performing bachelor’s students the possibility to
participate in the DKE Honours Programme. This programme offers two variants MaRBle
2.0 and KE@Work.
MaRBle 2.0
In MaRBle 2.0, you will get the opportunity to work on a state-of-the-art research
project. Work will be organized in a similar way as in professional research institutes
where participants work together as individual experts on a team project. For more
information on the MaRBle 2.0 please contact dr. R. Möckel
(rico.mockel@maastrichtuniversity.nl)
KnowledgeEngineering@Work (KE@Work)
Students admitted to the KE@Work path are placed at a business through a careful
selection and matching process. During the full second and third year of the bachelor
program, they spend 50% of the time in class and 50% at the business, where they
work on solving academic challenges and complex business problems, under
supervision of dedicated business and university supervisors. For more information
on KE@Work, please contact Carla Franken, kework@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
Both honours programme takes place in years two and three of your bachelor’s
programme. Selection of honours students will happen in the second semester of
Student Handbook 2020-2021
95
MSc
year 1. If you successfully complete the honours programme, this will be certified on
an honour’s diploma supplement.
2.7 Educational Minor Bachelor DKE
The Educational Minor leads to a limited second-degree teaching qualification. If you
have successfully finished the minor, you are qualified to teach at lower secondary
schools of VWO, HAVO and VMBO-tl (MAVO) level. Students in the BSc Data Science
and Artificial Intelligence can -upon successful completion - acquire a teaching
qualification for the main subject of Mathematics. The Educational Minor will be
organised in close cooperation with the Fontys Leraren Opleiding (Teacher Training)
in Sittard (FLOS) and Tilburg (FLOT). The main language of the Educational Minor is
Dutch.
The programme contains several pedagogical-didactic courses in semester 5, along
with education aimed at teaching methodology. There is also a mandatory practical
internship, in the form of work placements, which is spread out over semester 5 and
6. The education meetings mostly take place at UM and occasionally at the Fontys
Leraren Opleiding in Sittard. The practical internship will be done at several secondary
schools in the whole province of Limburg and will continue until the end of semester
6. During the practical internship, the student spends one day a week at a secondary
school for the course of a full school year. In this way, the necessary teaching
experience is obtained. Knowledge and practice are closely connected in the
Educational Minor.
Successful completion of the educational minor yields 35 ECTS of which five are
extracurricular. This means that these 5 ECTS cannot be used to replace any other
components of the original bachelor program.
The minor is UM wide and is also open to students of other UM faculties. Students in
the BSc Data Science and Artificial Intelligence who wish to participate in the
program should have accumulated, by the end of their second year, all 60 ECTS from
the first year components and at least 52 ECTS from the second year components.
Prior to their enrolment in this minor, a motivated request for participation has to be
submitted in Dutch to the Board of Examiners (dke-exams@maastrichtuniversity.nl).
Enrolment is dependent on selection and prior permission of the Board of Examiners.
If you have any questions regarding the contents of this educational minor, then
please contact prof. dr. Frank Thuijsman, (f.thuijsman@maastrichtuniversity.nl).
Student Handbook 2020-2021
96
3 Facilities for students
In this chapter, you will get an overview of possible facilities that Maastricht
University offers its students.
3.1 Student Affairs Office
The Student Affairs Office, among other things, takes care of the organization and
administration of the education.
Visiting address:
Paul-Henri Spaaklaan 1, 6229 GT Maastricht
Postal address: P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, the Netherlands.
Office hours:
PHS, C.1006 daily between 10.00 - 11.00 hrs. and 15.00 - 16.00 hrs.
Contact:
Admissions: boa@maastrichtuniversity.nl, Tel.: +31(0)43 388 26 77
Exam Administration: bo-dke@maastrichtuniversity.nl, Tel.: +31(0)43 388 35 25
Scheduling: scheduling-dke@maastrichtuniversity.nl, Tel.: +31(0)43 388 35 25
3.2 Administrative structure of the Faculty
The administrative structure of the Faculty is laid down in the faculty
regulations. The dean is responsible for the faculty’s administration.
More information is to be found on the website:
www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/dke.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
97
Faculty Board
The Faculty Board, chaired by the dean of the Faculty of Science and Engineering, runs
the Faculty. The Faculty Board is charged with the general management and administration,
as well as its policy regarding academic research and education.
Faculty Council
The Faculty Council is entitled to submit proposals and present their opinion to the
Faculty Board regarding any matters relating to faculty administration, policy, education
and research. The Faculty Council has rights of approval, e.g. regarding faculty regulations,
research programmes, and the implementation of a binding study advice, and rights of
advice, e.g. regarding the budget.
Director of Studies
The directors of studies (prof. dr. Mark Winands for the Master programmes and dr. Pietro
Bonizzi for the Bachelor Programme) are responsible for the organization and coordination
of all teaching activities. The DKE Education Programme Committee (EPC) advises the
directors of studies.
Programme Committee
There is one EPC for the Bachelor’s Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, and the two
Master’s programmes in Artificial Intelligence and Data Science for Decision Making.
The EPC is responsible for advising the Faculty Board, the Director of Studies and the
Board of Examiners. Furthermore, the EPC is entitled to advice in any subject related to
the programme, and consists out of eight members, four students and four members of
the academic staff. In addition, there are two advisors: the quality assurance officer and
the study advisor.
All correspondence for the Programme Committee should be addressed to
Dke-secretariat@maastrichtuniversity.nl or by postal mail to:
Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering - Maastricht University
P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht.
Board of Examiners
The Board of Examiners is in charge of the organization and supervision of the
examinations and is appointed by the Faculty Board. All correspondence for the Board of
Examiners should be addressed to
dke-exams@maastrichtuniversity.nl or by postal mail to:
Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering - Maastricht University
Student Affairs Office, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht.
Board of Admissions for the Master’s Programmes
The Board of Admissions is responsible for granting the admission requests for entering
a master’s programme, and is appointed by the Faculty Board. All correspondence for the
Board of Admissions should be addressed to
boa@maastrichtuniversity.nl or by postal mail to:
Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering - Maastricht University
Student Affairs Office, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
98
3.3 Teaching Material
For each project, a project book is published. The project books and the education
schedules of each period are available two weeks before the start of a new period, at
the latest. If the prospectus makes no mention of study material (= obligatory
literature) or recommended literature, the study material will be mentioned on a
separate book list that is available on the course information page in Canvas or at the
teacher’s office. All students will receive a letter from the study association Incognito,
which can order the books with a discount at the bookshop.
3.4 Participation in the Education
The students are expected to be available from Monday through Friday from 08.30
a.m. to 18.00 p.m. for educational activities.
3.5 Announcements concerning Educational Matters
Announcements concerning educational matters will be published through the
Student Portal. In the hallway of the building there are bulletin boards and TV screens
where relevant announcement are also published. General announcements for
students will also be published in the newspaper of Maastricht University the
Observant. The Observant appears every Thursday. Students are mainly approached
through e-mail and through the Student Portal. We advise students to check for new
announcements/emails daily.
3.6 Change of Address Student
Except for the Student Portal, the bulletin board, the Observant, the Student Affairs
Office makes use of mailings to students. Overviews of study results and results of
examinations may be sent by regular mail. If there is a change in the study address or
the address of the student’s parents, this should immediately be changed in Studielink.
Do not forget to mention the commencing date of the change. During the academic
year, the student’s study address is considered as their postal address. You may contact
boa@maastrichtuniversity.nl for help.
3.7 Computer Rooms and Project Rooms
Scheduled practical lectures have priority over private use by students. The room is
open to students from Monday through Friday from 08.00 a.m. until 06.00 p.m.
Students can use these computers to make exercises, develop software, and
communicate with other people outside the institute. The computers are connected
to the university network Maasnet. Several software packages have been installed,
such as Word, Access, Powerpoint, Matlab, Mathematica and Java.
Also specific packages that will be used during the courses have been installed.
The computer facilities are managed by the system managers of DKE, which can be
contacted by emailing lo-fhs@maastrichtuniversity.nl or by phone +31(0)43-388 54 93.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
99
Project/meeting rooms
Scheduled practical lectures have priority over private use of the project rooms by
students. The rooms are open to students from Monday through Friday from 08.00 a.m.
until 06.00 p.m. Wireless internet is available throughout the whole building. For
questions about the system management of the computer room, please refer to the
system managers of DKE, tel. +31(0)43-388 54 93 or by mail:
lo-fse@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
House rules for all computer/project/meeting rooms;
- Users are not allowed to download illegally acquired materials;
- Users are not allowed to illegally download materials
- Users are not allowed to install illegally acquired software;
- Users should use their own devices for saving data, or save your data on your personal
network drive (I:);
- Users should handle the furniture with care;
- It is strictly forbidden to eat or drink in these rooms;
- For the regulation of the air conditioning system, students may contact the Student
Support staff.
3.8 Faculty Counsellors for Students
Study Adviser
The study advisers Tessa Fox and Wendy Brandt are staff members whom you can contact
if you have any questions concerning your study and can be reached at telephone number
+31(0)43-3885361, in room C.1012 at PHS and through sa-dke@maastrichtuniversity.nl
They are familiar with the organization of the education, the faculty organization and the
study. The study adviser is a primary advisor for students. If your study comes to a
standstill, for whatever reason, you can contact the study adviser. It is also the right person
to talk to if you have any questions to which you cannot find any answers in the faculty
prospectus or during faculty information meetings. But also in case of personal circumstances due to which your study or personal life are suffering, for instance illness or family
circumstances, your study adviser can help. In a situation like that it is very important to
contact the study adviser in time, with respect to a possible appeal by the Regulations on
Financial Support for Students. The study adviser may also call up students for a talk if it
appears that their results are falling back.
Internationalization
For any questions, you may have about studying a semester at a foreign university, or
about a practical training abroad, for support, and for direct information you can
contact during opening hours DKE’s international relations officer Wendy Brandt via
dke-international@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
3.9 Student Services Centre (SSC)
The Student Services Centre is responsible for the preparation and execution of the
policy of Maastricht University in the area of general student provisions. The Student
Services Centre sees to the maintaining of the relationship with new students and
alumni, an agreeable living environment for students and student associations, and
guidance unrelated to the studies. The SSC publicizes current information in the
university magazine Observant and provides extensive information on the Internet.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
100
Students are able to ask questions via the electronic service centre. In short, this
department has a number of specialized service units for student-related issues such
as accommodation, sports, information on studies and work and career advice. In
addition, there is a central information desk in the main entrance hall of the Visitors’
Centre, to which current and prospective students may address their questions.
Visiting address: Bonnefantenstraat 2, Tel.: +31(0)43-388 53 88,
www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/ssc.
3.9.1 Visitors’ Centre and student registration
Information Desk
 The information desk in the UM Visitors’ Centre at Bonnefantenstraat 2 is the first
point of contact for current and new students. It provides the following services:
• Help with admission and (re)registration;
• Information on and help with visas, scholarships, bank accounts and (health)
insurance;
• Changing of address;
• Payment of tuition fees;
• Cancellation of registration;
• Reimbursement of tuition fees;
• Proof of payment/registration;
• Collection of your first UM-card;
• Help with housing;
• Appointments with student deans, psychologists, and career services;
• UM gifts.
Please feel free to contact our Call centre for answers to any of your questions
regarding studying at Maastricht University.
Tel.: +31(0)43-388 53 88, e-mail: study@maastrichtuniversity.nl
FAQ: https://ssc.esc.maastrichtuniversity.nl
Opening hours Monday-Friday 08.30 a.m.-18.00 p.m.
Admissions
The Admissions Office is responsible for helping prospective bachelor’s and master’s
students with their admission to Maastricht University. They provide information on
diploma evaluation, admission procedures, sufficiency tests for courses and languages,
etc. They are also responsible for the coordination of the prospective students’ admissions audit. The Admission Office works in close cooperation with the Registration, Visa
and Scholarship Office to provide the best possible service to prospective students.
For any questions on admissions, please contact the Admissions Office by e-mail:
study@maastrichtuniversity.nl or contact their Call centre +31(0)43-388 53 88.
Visa and Scholarship Office
The Visa and Scholarship Office is responsible for immigration matters and scholarships for prospective and current students. The Visa Office offers prospective and
current students assistance with obtaining visas, work or residence permits and with
the extension of residence permits. For any questions on visas, please visit our
website: www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/visa or e-mail: visa@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
101
Scholarship Office
Prospective and current students can obtain information about scholarships (Socrates/
Erasmus, HSP Huygens, cultural treaties, NFP, UM High Potential and UM Company
scholarships). For any questions on visas, please visit our website:
www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/scholarships or e-mail: scholarships@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
3.9.2 UM Career Services
UM Career Services aims at assisting students in successful preparation for their future
career. This goal is achieved by providing students with the required education,
information, advice and counselling. In addition UM Career Services links students of
Maastricht University to the job market in various ways.
UM Career Services offers workshops, job Interview simulations, Quick career advise and
more intensive counseling. For more information, please see
www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/careerservices or contact your study adviser at DKE
3.9.3 Student Guidance
At Maastricht University, you are expected to be independent and take care of all your
affairs yourself. This does not mean you will not have any questions! The student
counsellors can surely answer many of your questions. Below an overview of the
counsellors working at Student Services Centre:
Psychological support (Student psychologists)
Student Psychologists may be consulted in case of personal problems. Examples of
complaints and problems include:
• Study related problems like study stress and fear of failure;
• Psychological complaints such as anxiety, depression, eating disorders, stress-related
complaints, lack of confidence, dealing with traumatic experiences.
It need not be obvious beforehand what the problem is before an appointment can be
made with one of the student psychologists.
The student psychologists can help you by means of individual guidance and/or group
training (in Dutch and English). Examples of group training; Training course on fear of
failure, Study efficacy Group, Mourning Group, Stress management, Assertiveness
training, etc. For more information: www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/studentguidance
e-mail: studentenpsychologen@maastrichtuniversity.nl
For making an appointment tel.: +31(0)43-388 53 88 or use the online tool on
the website: www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/studentguidance
Study related legal support (Student deans)
Student Deans help you when you have questions about:
Student Deans help you when you have questions about:
• Your rights in case of a study delay because of illness, pregnancy, family circumstances
or practising top sports;
• Student grants;
• Studying with a functional impairment;
• Membership of a council, board, committee or membership of the board of a student
organization;
Student Handbook 2020-2021
102
• Other questions concerning your rights as a student.
For more information: www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/studentguidance
e-mail: studentendecanen@maastrichtuniversity.nl
Open visiting hours at the SSC, please check the website for correct timeslots
Studying with a disability, chronic illness or dyslexia
It is important to Maastricht University that students with a functional impairment
can successfully complete their studies without too much delay. By functional
impairment UM means all disorders that are of a permanent or temporary character.
Amongst these are all motor, sensory or psychological disorders, but also non-visible
disorders, such as dyslexia, chronic illness, physical complaints, depression and the
like. The Service desk Disability Management (DM) is available to students (with a
functional impairment), prospective students, student counsellors, teachers, parents
and others who are interested and offers:
• Information (about studying with impairment, laws, (UM-) regulations and external
organizations);
• Advice;
• Support (for example, by arranging facilities);
• Help with requesting (education) facilities;
• Help answering questions about studying with a functional impairment;
• Assistance addressing complaints and problems with regard to this topic.
When you have a functional impairment or if you get confronted with an impairment
during your study, this might imply that adjustments and facilities are needed in
order to reduce study hindrances and delays. Facilities have to be requested on time.
The Service desk closely cooperates with student deans, study advisers, student
psychologists and career counsellors.
For more information: www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/disability
e-mail: disability@maastrichtuniversity.nl
Open visiting hours: Monday - Thursday from 11.00 a.m. to 13.00 p.m.
Tel.: +31(0)43-388 52 72.
3.9.4 Student Housing
Student housing helps students find accommodation in Maastricht and the surrounding
area. All mediation and registration takes place via www.maastrichthousing.com.
Most students, who study abroad, opt for a room in the University Guesthouse, and so
you only need to contact the Student Services Centre for more information.
3.9.5 Studium Generale
Studium Generale is a University department that offers a wide program of lectures
and cultural activities on a variety of themes. You can visit the activities from
September through May (academic year). The programme of Studium Generale
consists of:
• Interesting lectures and exiting debates;
• SG on Stage: comedy, pop music, world music and theatre. You can also perform at
the Open Mic, the student singer-songwriter contest and the battle of the bands;
• The SG Science Café, a meeting place for scientists and university students.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
103
An opportunity to debate with scientists in an informal atmosphere. For more
information: www.sg.unimaas.nl
3.9.6 Sports
University sports at their best: affordable, relaxing, open, challenging and international.
More information visit: www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/lifeum/sports-maastricht
3.9.7 Center for European Studies (CES)
If you are a student who would like to study at Maastricht University for one semester
or for a summer program, you can study through the Center for European Studies
(CES). You can choose from the wide variety of all courses that the UM offers. CES is
there to ensure full integration into university life and help you with all kinds of
questions you might have, both academic and practical. If you are looking for a
fantastic European experience, individual guidance, 24/7 assistance in case of an
emergency and help with anything from an airport pick-up to finding a room, CES is
the place to be.
For more Information: www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/ces
e-mail: ces.info@maastrichtuniversity.nl Tel.: +31(0)43-321 52 82.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
104
BSc EER
4 Transnational
University Limburg
The transnational University Limburg (tUL) is a cooperation between the universities of
Hasselt and Maastricht. Both Master programmes are embedded in the School of
Information Technology (SIT) of the tUL. It is possible to follow incidental courses at the
campus of the tUL at Hasselt University, Belgium. Students who want to make use of
this possibility should individually ask permission to the Board of Examiners of DKE.
More information on the content of these courses can be found at:
www.uhasselt.be/informatica
5 Education and Examination
Regulations 2020-2021(EER)
Maastricht University, Faculty of Humanities and Sciences,
Department of Data Science & Knowledge Engineering
5.1 Bachelor Data Science and Knowledge Engineering
Section 1 | General Provisions
Article 1.1 Applicability of the regulations
Article 1.2 Definitions
Section 2 | Admission
Article 2.1 Matching
Article 2.2 Pre-university education requirements
Article 2.3 Language requirement with non-Dutch diplomas
Article 2.4 Entrance examination (colloquium doctum)
Section 3 | Content and Structure of the Programme
Article 3.1a Objectives of the programme
Article 3.1b Qualifications of the programme
Article 3.2 Form of the programme
Article 3.3 Language of instruction
Article 3.4 Communications and announcement of decisions
Article 3.5 Study load
Article 3.6 Content of the programme
Article 3.7 Projects and Bachelor Thesis
Article 3.8 Minor Entrepreneurship
Article 3.9 Educational Minor
Student Handbook 2020-2021
105
BSc EER
Article 3.10 Study Abroad
Article 3.11 KE@Work
Article 3.12 MaRBLe 2.0
Article 3.13 Flexible programme and flexible bachelor’s
Article 3.14 The examination
Section 4 | Education
Article 4.1 Courses; composition; actual design
Article 4.2 Entrance requirements; Prior knowledge
Article 4.3 Course registration
Article 4.4 Attendance and best-efforts obligation
Article 4.5 Participation and priority rules
Article 4.6 Practical training
Section 5 | Assessment
Article 5.1 General
Article 5.2 Marks
Article 5.3 Order of exams
Article 5.4 Scheduling and frequency of the exams
Article 5.5 Registration for exams
Article 5.6 Form of the exams
Article 5.7 Oral exams
Article 5.8 Assessments in exceptional cases
Article 5.9 Practicals and written assignments
Article 5.10 Determination and announcement of exam result
Article 5.11 Right of inspection
Article 5.12 Period of validity
Article 5.13 Retention period for exams
Article 5.14 Exemption
Article 5.15 Fraud
Article 5.15a Invalid exam
Article 5.16 Unsuitability (Iudicium Abeundi)
Section 6 | Examination
Article 6.1 Examination
Article 6.2 Degree
Article 6.3 Certificate and statements
Article 6.4 Grade point average (GPA)
Article 6.5 Honours programme certificate
Article 6.6 Right of appeal
Section 7 | Study Guidance and advice
Article 7.1 Study progress administration
Article 7.2 Study guidance
Article 7.3 Study advice for the propaedeutic phase
Article 7.4 Standards
Article 7.5 Negative binding study advice (nBSA)
Article 7.6 Procedure
Article 7.7 Personal circumstances
Article 7.8 Hardship clause
Student Handbook 2020-2021
106
BSc EER
Section 8 | Transitional and Final Provisions
Article 8.1 Amendments
Article 8.2 Notice
Article 8.2a Evaluation
Article 8.3 Unforeseen cases/safety net scheme
Article 8.4 Effective date
Appendices
Appendix 1 Courses with limited capacity (art. 4.5)
Appendix 2 Equivalent pre-university education
Appendix 3 Regulations for exchange programmes to study abroad
Appendix 4 Accountability for the language of instruction
Section 1 | General provisions
Article 1.1 Applicability of the regulations
These regulations apply to the education and exams and examinations of the bachelor’s
programme Data Science and Knowledge Engineering (hereinafter to be referred to as:
‘the programme’) and to all students who are registered for the programme.
The programme is provided by the Faculty of Science and Engineering, hereafter called the
faculty, at the Department of Data Science & Knowledge Engineering, hereafter to be
called the department.
The regulations were adopted by the faculty board after advice and consent from the
programme committee and after consent from or in consultation with the faculty council.
The regulations will take effect on 1 September 2020 for the 2020-2021 academic year.
These regulations also apply to students from other programmes, faculties or institutions
of higher education, insofar as they follow components of the programme to which these
Education and Examination Regulations apply.
For components of the programme that students follow at another degree programme,
faculty or institution of higher education, the Education and Examination Regulations for
the other programme, faculty or institution apply to the component in question.
Article 1.2 Definitions
In these regulations, the following definitions apply:
a. The Act: the Higher Education and Scientific Research Act (Wet op het hoger
onderwijs en wetenschappelijk onderzoek);
b. Student: a person who is registered at the university for education and/or to take
exams and the examination of the programme;
c. Course: a study unit of the programme within the meaning of the Act;
d. Propaedeutic phase: the initial period for the programme with a study load of 60
credits, coinciding with course year 1;
e. Course year: year 1, year 2 or year 3 of the programme;
f. Academic year: the period from 1 September of a calendar year up to and including
31 August of the following calendar year;
g. Programme: the bachelor’s programme referred to in Article 1.1 of these regulations,
consisting of a coherent whole of study units;
h. Exam: a component of the examination as referred to in Article 7.10 of the Act;
i. Practical / Skill: practical exercise as referred to in Article 7.13(2)(d) of the Act, in one
of the following forms:
Student Handbook 2020-2021
107
BSc EER
- writing a thesis;
- carrying out a (group) project;
- performing a research assignment;
- developing a software program;
- writing a paper, creating a technological design or performing another written
assignment;
- participating in field work or a field trip;
- completing an internship;
- participating in an activity intended to develop certain skills;
j. Project Skill: practical training associated as part of the project.
k. Examination: the final examination for the bachelor’s programme;
l. Credit: a unit expressed in ECTS credits, with one credit equalling 28 hours of study;
m. Board of Examiners: the board referred to in Article 7.12 of the Act;
n. Programme Committee: the representation and advisory body that carries out the
duties described in Article 9.18 and 9.38c of the Act;
o. Examiner: the person designated by the Board of Examiners to administer exams
and to determine the results of such exams;
p. Faculty Board: the faculty board of the Faculty of Science and Engineering, as
referred to in Article 9.12 of the Act;
q. Negative Binding Study Advice: the advice in accordance with Article 7.8b of the Act
entailing that the student cannot continue in the programme;
r. Semester: part of an academic year, either starting first of September and running
for 20 educational weeks, or starting first of February running for 21 educational
weeks;
s. Block: part of a semester during which educational activities take place;
t. KE: Data Science and Knowledge Engineering;
u. DKE: Department of Data Science & Knowledge Engineering;
v. UM: Maastricht University;
w. BSA Committee: the committee that issues the (negative) Binding Study Advice on
behalf of the Faculty Board;
x. Student Handbook: the programme guide, which includes further details about
programme specific provisions and information.
The other terms have the meaning given to them by the Act.
Section 2 | Admissions
Article 2.1 Matching
Participation in matching is an optional part of the admission procedure. The matching
process starts with filling out an online questionnaire. A member of the academic staff and
the study adviser will assess the answers and give their feedback via email. Based on the
outcome, the prospective student may receive an invitation to come in for a personal
meeting with a member of the academic staff and the study adviser.
Article 2.2 Pre-university education requirements
A person will be granted admission to the programme if he/she has a pre-university
education diploma referred to in Article 7.24 of the Act with the pre-university education
profile having WI B; or if he/she has been exempted from this under the Act. Equivalent
non-Dutch diplomas are referred in Appendix 2.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
108
BSc EER
Persons who do not have a diploma with the pre-university education profile having WI B,
which grants admission to the programme, but who have an equivalent diploma which
grants admission to the programme under the Act, may register for the programme only
after demonstrating that he or she has sufficient knowledge on the level of the final
pre-university education examination of the following subject of the required pre-university
education profile: Mathematics B.
Article 2.3 Language requirement with non-Dutch diplomas
a. Holders of a non-Dutch diploma can only register if they have met the minimum
English language requirement corresponding to IELTS (international English Language
Testing System) with a score of at least 6.0
b. The requirement referred to under (a) is met if the person concerned has obtained one
of the following diplomas or certificates:
• A secondary education diploma issued in an EU/EEA country where the person
concerned has followed English up to and including the final year;
• A diploma issued in an non-EU/EEA country that is at least equivalent to a VWO
diploma and where English is the official language of instruction in education;
• A completed bachelor’s or master’s study programme where the language of
instruction is English;
• an International or European Baccalaureate, a US high school diploma or UK GCE
A-levels, or
• Can demonstrate sufficient proficiency in English, for example through English
taught courses, internships or work experience in an English environment, or
• can submit one of the following language test certificates.
 • IELTS (6.0 minimum)
 • TOEFL Paper-based test (550 minimum)
 • OEFL Internet test (80 minimum)
 • TOEFL Computer test (213 minimum)
 • TOEIC (670 minimum) the modules ‘listening and reading’ and ‘speaking and
writing’ must be completed successfully
 • Cambridge [First Certificate in English (FCE) Grade B, First Certificate in English
(FCE) Grade C] or
 • similar accredited certification
Article 2.4 Entrance examination (Colloquium Doctum)
1. A person who does not meet the prerequisites referred to in Articles 2.1 and 2.2 can
take part in an entrance examination (colloquium doctum), in accordance with Article
7.29 of the Act.
2. A person who wishes to sit the colloquium doctum must be aged twenty-one or over
on the date the prospective program starts. This requirement may be waived if the
person in question holds a diploma issued outside the Netherlands that grants
admission in the country of origin to a programme at a higher education institution.
The age requirement can also be waived if the person in question has refugee status
and cannot present his/her diploma for this reason.
3. The entrance examination referred to in Article 7.29 of the Act concerns the following
subjects at the level indicated:
• Mathematics: Performing a number of exercises based on the subjects that are
discussed in some chapters of a book to be specified later. These exercises are given in
English.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
109
BSc EER
4. The Board of Examiners may lay down further instructions in the Rules and
Regulations.
5. The Board of Examiners is responsible for conducting this examination.
Section 3 | Contents and Structure of the Programme
Article 3.1a Objectives of the programme
The goals of the programme are as follows:
1. To educate students at an academic level in Data Science and Knowledge
Engineering based upon Mathematics, Computer Science, and Artificial Intelligence.
2. To teach students how to analyse and to solve both Data Science and Knowledge
Engineering problems in a variety of application domains.
3. To prepare students to work in teams by organizing the education in Data Science
and Knowledge Engineering according to the Project-Centred Learning system.
4. To prepare students for continuing their studies, in particular the Master programmes in Artificial Intelligence, Data Science for Decision Making and Computer
Science offered by the transnational University Limburg (tUL), or for a career in the
professional field (IT industry or IT-related application domains).
5. To stimulate students to acquire an international academic orientation.
Article 3.1b Qualifications of the programme
The 29 qualifications of the programme are as follows:
I. Knowledge and understanding
The recipient of a Bachelor of Science degree in Data Science and Knowledge Engineering
should have:
1. Basic understanding of key areas in Data Science;
2. Advanced knowledge of a specific area in Data Science up to a level that without
further requirements grants access to a Master programme in this area;
3. Basic understanding of key areas in Artificial Intelligence;
4. Advanced knowledge of a specific area in Artificial Intelligence up to a level that
without further requirements grants access to a Master programme in this area;
5. Basic understanding of key areas in Computer Science and in Applied Mathematics;
6. Advanced knowledge of a specific area in Computer Science and in Applied
Mathematics up to a level that without further requirements grants access to a
Master programme in this area.
II. Applying knowledge and understanding for problem solving and design
The recipient of a Bachelor of Science degree in Data Science and Knowledge Engineering
should have at least the following thirteen abilities:
7. The ability to understand, apply, formulate, and validate models from the domains of
Data Science and Artificial Intelligence;
8. The ability to extract information from data, to interpret results and to convey them;
9. The ability to apply knowledge from the key areas of Artificial Intelligence;
10. The ability to apply the support modules for Artificial Intelligence;
11. The ability to apply methods and tools from applied mathematics and operations
research in particular;
12. The ability for constructing and evaluating mathematical and computational
methods for a range of application domains;
13. The ability to submit an argument in the exact sciences to critical appraisal;
Student Handbook 2020-2021
110
BSc EER
14. The ability to think analytically and critically, and to apply logical reasoning;
15. The ability to cooperate in a group and to participate effectively as an academic
professional;
16. The ability to create an effective project plan for solving a Data Science and/or
Artificial Intelligence problem in a supervised context;
17. The ability to apply Data Science and Artificial Intelligence methods and techniques in
a business-related practice;
18. The ability to transpose academic knowledge and expertise in a variety of application
domains;
19. Readiness to address new problems in new areas, emerging from scientific and
professional fields.
III. Making judgments
The recipient of a Bachelor of Science degree in Data Science and Knowledge
Engineering should have:
20. The ability to review critically (a) results, (b) arguments, and (c) problem statements
from accepted perspectives in the field of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence;
21. A reasonable level of competence in searching and critically processing the
professional literature in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence;
22. A reasonable familiarity with the standards of academic criticism;
23. An awareness of, and responsibility for ethical, normative and social consequences
of developments in science and technology, particularly resulting from Data Science
and Artificial Intelligence.
IV. Communication
The recipient of a Bachelor of Science degree in Data Science and Knowledge
Engineering should have:
24. Academically appropriate communicative skills, i.e., the ability to (a) communicate
ideas effectively in written form and through the use of Information and Communication Technology, (b) give effective oral presentations, both formally and
informally, and (c) understand and offer constructive criticism of the presentations
of others;
25. International communication skills;
26. Elementary effectiveness in leading group-wise communication.
V. Learning skills
The recipient of a Bachelor of Science degree in Data Science and Knowledge
Engineering should be able to:
27. Reflect on (a) one’s own style of thought, (b) one’s own working methods, and (c)
one’s own readiness to take the necessary corrective action;
28. Recognize the need for continued learning throughout a professional career;
29. The ability to manage one’s own learning and development.
Article 3.2 Form of the programme
This is a full-time programme. The programme commences once a year in September.
Article 3.3 Language of instruction
1. The programme is given in English (accountability for this language of instruction is
given in Appendix 4). Components of the programme may be in Dutch or in another
common language in the EU.
2. Dutch, English, French and/or German texts may be used in the education and
exams in the programme.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
111
BSc EER
Article 3.4 Communications and announcement of decisions
1. The Faculty Board, the Board of Examiners, the DKE Management Team and the
examiners may use the Student Portal and email via the UM account for communications relating to the education and examinations.
2. The Faculty Board, the Board of Examiners, the DKE Management Team and the
examiners may use My UM and e-mail via the UM account to announce decisions.
3. The student must regularly check his/her university e-mail address, the DKE website
and the digital learning environment. Information disseminated via e-mail, the digital
learning environment or the website will be assumed to be known.
Article 3.5 Study load
The programme has a study load of 180 credits (ECTS), with one credit equalling
28 hours of study.
Article 3.6 Content of the programme
1 The programme includes the following components with the stated study load:
Year 1 Course ECTS
Block 1.1 Introduction to Data Science & Artificial Intelligence 4
Introduction to Computer Science 1 4
Discrete Mathematics 4
Project 1-1
Block 1.2 Computational and Cognitive Neuroscience 4
Introduction to Computer Science 2 4
Linear Algebra 4
Project 1-1
Block 1.3 Project 1-1 6
Block 1.4 Calculus 4
Data Structures and Algorithms 4
ICT and Knowledge Management 4
Project 1-2
Block 1.5 Numerical Mathematics 4
Software Engineering 4
Logic 4
Project 1-2
Block 1.6 Project 1-2 6
Year 2 Course ECTS
Block 2.1 Databases 4
Graph Theory 4
Probability and Statistics 4
Project 2-1
Block 2.2 Reasoning Techniques 4
Machine Learning 4
Linear Programming 4
Project 2-1
Block 2.3 Project 2-1 6
Block 2.4 Human Computer Interaction and Affective Computing 4
Theoretical Computer Science 4
Student Handbook 2020-2021
112
BSc EER
Mathematical Modelling 4
Project 2-2
Block 2.5 Natural Language Processing* 4
Introduction to Image & Video Processing* 4
Philosophy & Artificial Intelligence 4
Simulation and Statistical Analysis 4
Project 2-2
Block 2.6 Project 2-2 6
*Electives (Second year students choose 1 out of 2 and may not register for a second one until
they are in year 3).
Year 3 Course ECTS
Block 3.1 Digital Society* 4
Game Theory* 4
Semantic Web* 4
Robotics and Embedded Systems* 4
Prolog* 4
Computer Security* 4
Project 3-1
Block 3.2 Large Scale IT and Cloud Computing* 4
Logic for Artificial Intelligence* 4
Software & Systems Verification* 4
Parallel Programming* 4
Introduction to Bio-Informatics* 4
Quantum Computing* 4
Project 3-1
Period 3.3 Project 3-1 6
Period 3.4 Data Analysis 4
Operations Research Case Studies 4
Intelligent Systems 4
Period 3.4-3.6 Bachelor Thesis 18
*Electives (Third year students choose 3 elective courses in each block (3.1 and 3.2)).
In case students have passed both electives of block 2.5, either the course Introduction to Image
& Video Processing or Natural Language Processing can replace 1 of the third year electives
2. After obtaining permission from the Board of Examiners, in blocks 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3,
students can also choose to (1) study abroad for a semester, (2) to study elective
courses at other UM bachelor programmes of at most 18 ECTS (3) the minor
Entrepreneurship or (4) the educational minor. These options cannot be combined
and cannot be taken extracurricular unless stated otherwise.
Article 3.7 Projects and Bachelor’s Thesis
The programme includes projects and thesis work for which additional regulations
apply as specified in the Rules and Regulations.
Article 3.8 Minor Entrepreneurship
1. The student has the possibility to choose the minor Entrepreneurship from SBE in blocks
3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 of the third year to fulfil part of the elective obligation in year 3.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
113
BSc EER
2. The minor Entrepreneurship has a total study load of 26 ECTS.
3. Every minor proposal has to be approved by the Board of Examiners.
Article 3.9 Educational Minor
1. Additionally, to the possibilities stated in Article 3.8, the student has the possibility to
choose an educational minor in year 3 that replaces the elective period in blocks 3.1,
3.2, and 3.3 of the third year.
2. This educational minor has a study load of 35 ECTS of which 5 are extracurricular,
hence do not count towards the study load referred to in Article 3.5.
3. For this minor it is required that the student is fluent in Dutch, is starting the minor no
later than his/her third year of enrolment of the programme and before starting the
minor has, in addition to study progress as mentioned in Article 5.3.2, obtained 52
ECTS from year 2.
4. The Board of Examiners can impose further conditions and restrictions.
5. Participation is only possible with prior permission of the Board of Examiners based on
a motivation letter in Dutch, study progress and suitability.
Article 3.10 Study Abroad
1. Students can apply to study abroad for a semester, at another University with whom
Maastricht University has an Agreement of Exchange.
2. Nomination is decided on by the Board of Examiners based on study progress as
mentioned in Article 5.3.2 and motivation of the student;
3. This study abroad will take place in block 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 and has a study load of 30
ECTS.
4. The selected course programme has to be approved by the Board of Examiners.
5. Further regulations can be found in Appendix 3.
Article 3.11 KE@Work
1. KE@Work is an honours programme during the second and third year.
2. Students selected by the KE@Work coordinator on the basis of academic performance and in accordance with the Rules and Regulations, can participate in KE@
Work. Students perform Data Science & Knowledge Engineering related tasks as part
of an internship for companies selected by the KE@Work coordinator.
3. KE@Work participation has to be approved by the Board of Examiners.
4. An examiner that will act as supervisor will be appointed for every KE@Work
internship.
5. KE@Work replaces each of the 3 projects of 6 ECTS in year 2 and 3 by individual
projects of 6 ECTS at the selected company. Additionally, the students dedicate their
bachelor thesis to a topic relevant for the internship company.
6. Every semester the study performance of the KE@Work student is evaluated. In case
study progress suffers, the student is transferred to the educational programme
stated in Article 3.6.
7. Additional regulations apply as specified in the Rules and Regulations.
Article 3.12 MaRBLe 2.0
1. The programme includes a research-based component called MaRBLe 2.0 (Maastricht
Research Based Learning (MaRBLe), which is an honours programme.
2. Students selected by the MaRBLe coordinator on the basis of academic performance
and in accordance with the Rules and Regulations, can participate in a state-of-theart research project.
3. Participation has to be approved by the Board of Examiners.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
114
BSc EER
4. For each project two or more examiners will be appointed.
5. MaRBLe 2.0 replaces each of the 2 projects of 6 ECTS in year 2 by individual projects
of 6 ECTS. MarBLe 2.0 concludes with a research-oriented bachelor thesis.
6. Students can optionally replace the project of 6 ECTS in year 3 by a (separate)
individual research project of 6 ECTS.
7. Every semester the study performance of the participating student is evaluated. In
case study progress suffers, the student is transferred to the educational programme
stated in Article 3.6.
8. Additional regulations apply as specified in the Rules and Regulations.
Article 3.13 Flexible programme and flexible bachelor’s
1. A student registered for one of the faculty’s programmes may, under certain
conditions, formulate an educational programme of his/her own which is different
from the educational programme stated in Article 3.6. The composition of such a
programme must be approved beforehand by the Board of Examiners.
2. The flexible programme must have a study load of 180 credits.
3. In granting the permission, the Board of Examiners will indicate which programme
offered by the faculty will include the programme formulated by the student for
purposes of the Education and Examination Regulations.
Article 3.14 The examination
The examination consists of the following components
a. Course year 1, offered from September 2013 or later:
exams from blocks 1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.5
projects 1-1 and 1-2
b. Course year 2, offered from September 2013 or later:
exams from blocks 2.1, 2.2, 2.4, 2.5
 projects 2-1 and 2-2, or completion of semesters 2-1 and 2-2 of a KE@Work / MaRBLe
project
c. Course year 3, offered from September 2013 or later:
 Semester 1: exams from 6 optional courses during blocks 3.1 and 3.2 and the project
3-1. Alternative options in the elective semester are (as further specified in section 3):
1. A study abroad semester with one of our partner universities;
2. Electives from other UM bachelor programmes with a maximum of 18 ECTS. They
are complemented by elective courses from this programme.
3. A minor as specified in paragraph 3.8, completed with an elective course at DKE or
the minor as specified in paragraph 3.9;
4. Participation in KE@Work / MaRBLe project (Latter option if extended with
permission of the Board of Examiners).
Semester 2: exams from block 3.4 and the Bachelor thesis.
Section 4 | Education
Article 4.1 Courses; composition; actual design
1. For the programme components, courses are given with the study load stated in
Article 3.6.
2. The education is given in the form of classes, project groups, practical training,
lectures, individual supervision, or otherwise. On average, the student has 18 hours
of face-to-face time per week, but this can differ per period. For further details,
please see the student handbook.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
115
BSc EER
3. The educational programme includes 41 weeks per year. During this period students
are expected to be available for educational activities.
Article 4.2 Entrance requirements; Prior knowledge
1. The student may only participate in the following components after he/she has
passed the listed components (indicated as prerequisites in the student handbook):
Year 1 Project 1-2: after attainment of two out of four courses from the set: Discrete
Mathematics, Linear Algebra, Computer Science I and Computer Science II.
Year 2 Project 2-1: after attainment of Project 1-1 and 2 out of 3 of Computer Science
I, Computer Science II, and Data Structures & Algorithms.
 Project 2-2: after attainment of Project 1-1, Project 1-2 and 2 out of 3 of
Computer Science I, Computer Science II, and Data Structures & Algorithms.
Year 3 Project 3-1: after attainment of Project 2-1.
2. Subject to the provisions in the first paragraph, the desired prior knowledge to
successfully participate in each course is indicated in the student handbook.
Article 4.3 Course registration
The student may participate in a course after he/she has timely registered for it through
the Student Portal.
Article 4.4 Attendance and best-efforts obligation
1. The student must participate in at least 70% of the scheduled meeting (e.g. lectures
and practical training) of each course in year 1.
2. A student who fails the attendance requirement for a component in year 1 is excluded
from the resit exam of that component.
3. Attendance and participation at project skill trainings and project meetings is
mandatory. In addition, each student is expected to participate actively in doing tasks
with respect to the project and to cooperate actively with their group in order to
successfully finish the project assignment.
4. Students who have not met the requirements in paragraph 3 and/or students whose
absence or inactivity during the project has been marked as inexcusable by the project
coordinator and/or students that have a substandard contribution to the group work
will not receive a pass for the project concerned.
5. Attendance and participation in other education activities may be part of an exam
when announced in the student handbook or student portal. Prior approval of the
Board of Examiners is required.
6. For resits that are offered for practical assignments, the examiner can require that the
student has made a reasonable attempt at the regular opportunity for that assignment. This requirement must be communicated upfront to the students on student
portal. The Board of Examiners can impose further restrictions in the Rules and
Regulations.
Article 4.5 Participation
The blocks mentioned in Appendix 1 are available to a limited number of students
enrolled at UM, provided that the students enrolled in the programme will anyhow be
placed in the blocks belonging to the compulsory part of their programme, in compliance
with the periods the faculty designated to them. For blocks belonging to the optional
parts of the bachelor’s programme, most places will be reserved for students enrolled in
the programme.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
116
BSc EER
Article 4.6 Practical training
Some courses indicated in Article 3.6 include a practical training for which additional
regulations apply as specified in the Rules and Regulations.
Section 5 | Assessment
Article 5.1 General
1. During a course, the student will be tested for academic training and the extent to
which the student has sufficiently achieved the stated learning objectives.
2. The student handbook describes the achievements the students must make to pass
the course and the criteria on which the student is assessed. Any amendments are
published on student portal.
3. The Rules and Regulations describe the assessment procedure.
Article 5.2 Marks
1. Marks are awarded on a scale of 1 to 10. Whole grades are awarded to exams. Both
half and whole grades can be awarded for study components of at least 10 ECTS as
well as for projects.
2. The student must receive a final mark of 6.0 or higher to pass the component.
3. The highest result attained determines the final mark.
4. NG (no grade) can be assigned as a result of plagiarism or academic dishonesty; or
when assessment is incomplete and no grade can be assigned. An NG automatically
constitutes a fail and no credit is awarded.
Article 5.3 Order of exams
1. If the student has obtained at least 45 credits in course year 1, he/she may take the
exams in course year 2.
2. If the student has obtained at least 60 credits in course year 1 and at least 40 credits
in course year 2, he/she may take the exams in course year 3.
3. If the student has obtained at least 60 credits in course year 1, at least 40 credits in
course year 2, and at least 140 ECTS overall, he/she may start the bachelor thesis in
course year 3.
4. The student may not take an exam for certain components until the entrance
requirements as stated in Article 4.2 have been fulfilled.
5. In conformance with article 7.30 paragraph 3 of the Act, the Board of Examiners may
grant a student permission to sit other exams than referred to in paragraphs
1, 2 and 3.
6. If a student deviates from the sequence as described in paragraphs 1 through 4,
without permission from the Board of Examiners, the result of the component in
question can be declared invalid.
Article 5.4 Scheduling and frequency of the exams
1. Students can take exams twice per academic year on dates to be determined by the
Board of Examiners: once during or directly after the block (first sit for the exam) and
once before the end of the semester in question (resit option).
2. Once a student successfully passes an exam, he/she can re-sit the exam upon
permission from the Board of Examiners.
3. In exceptional cases, the Board of Examiners can decide that an exam may be taken
at another time than determined in accordance with the first paragraph.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
117
BSc EER
Article 5.5 Registration for exams
1. The student may take an exam for a course for which he/she is registered, after he/
she has timely registered for the exam through the Student Portal.
2. For year 1 the resit-exam concerned is only available for students who have
complied with the compulsory attendance requirement as stated in Article 4.4.
3. In exceptional cases, the Board of Examiners may, at the student’s request, exempt
the student from the obligation in Article 4.4.
4. If a student deviates from the conditions as described in paragraphs 1 through 3,
the result of the component in question will be declared invalid.
Article 5.6 Form of the exams
1. In principle, the exams are written. ‘Written exams’ also include taking these
exams by computer.
2. In principle all exams and assignments with the exception of projects are on an
individual basis, unless explicitly announced otherwise.
3. Oral exams can only take place upon prior approval by the Board of Examiners.
4. The form of the exam is announced by the examiner at the start of the course.
5. Upon request, students with a disability may take exams in a manner which
accommodates their specific disability as much as possible. If necessary, the Board
of Examiners will obtain expert advice where necessary from DKE’s study adviser
and/or the student dean at the Student Services Centre (SSC) before taking a
decision in such matters.
Article 5.7 Oral exams
1. Oral exams are taken only by one person at a time, unless the Board of Examiners
decides otherwise.
2. An oral exam is given by the examiner in the presence of a second examiner, unless
the Board of Examiners has decided otherwise.
3. Oral exams take place in public, unless the Board of Examiners or the relevant
examiner decides otherwise in special cases.
Article 5.8 Assessments in exceptional cases
A student can submit a request to the Board of Examiners for an individual assessment
1. This request may be granted if the student has not passed the exam in question due
to exceptional circumstances and not granting an individual assessment would
result in an unacceptable study delay.
2. The following criteria apply to the granting of an individual assessment for the final
component of the programme:
- It must be the final study result to be obtained.
- The study delay in case the individual assessment is not granted must be at least
one semester.
- The student must have taken part in the last two regular exam opportunities for
the exam for which he/she is requesting another assessment.
Article 5.9 Practicals and written assignments
1. The Board of Examiners may draw up guidelines for the practicals, which include
group projects, internships and theses. The guidelines will be included in the Rules
and Regulations.
2. The bachelor’s thesis project will be evaluated by at least two examiners (the
relevant supervisor and a second evaluator), at least two of them are affiliated with
the programme for which the student is registered.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
118
BSc EER Student Handbook 2020-2021
1159
Article 5.10 Determination and announcement of exam results
1. The Board of Examiners determines the standards for assessing each examination
component. The standards are included in the Rules and Regulations.
2. The examiner determines the result of a written exam within 15 working days of
the date on which it was taken and at least 10 working days before the resit, and
provides the Education Office with the necessary information to apprise the
student of the result.
3. The examiner determines the result of an oral exam within 24 hours and issues the
relevant certificate to the student. If more than one student takes the same exam
after each other, this period may be extended by up to five working days.
4. When the result of a written exam is announced, it will be indicated how the
student can inspect the exam and file an appeal as referred to in Article 6.6.
Article 5.11 Right of inspection
1. Within 10 working days of the date on which the result of a written exam,
including a computer-based exam, is announced, students may inspect their
evaluated work.
2. Within the period referred to in paragraph 1, any interested party may, upon
request, inspect the questions and assignments for the written exam and, if
possible, the standards based on which it was assessed.
Article 5.12 Period of validity
1. Exams which have been passed are valid for an unlimited period. Contrary to the
above the Board of Examiners may require the participant to take an additional or
replacement exam or examination component for an exam that was passed more
than six years ago if the student’s knowledge or insight that was examined is
demonstrably outdated or the skills that were examined are demonstrably outdated.
2. If exceptional circumstances apply as referred to in Article 7.51 paragraph two of
the Act, the period of six years in paragraph one will be extended by the duration of
the financial support the student receives from the profiling fund.
3. Sub-tests and assignments that were passed within a component, which was not
passed, will lose their validity after the academic year in which they were passed
unless the Board of Examiners states otherwise.
Article 5.13 Retention period for exams
1. The exercises, answers and the evaluated work of the written exams will be
retained in paper or digital form for two years after the exam/examination result is
determined.
2. The bachelor thesis and its evaluation will be kept for at least seven years after the
evaluation.
Article 5.14 Exemption
The Board of Examiners may, at a student’s request and having heard the relevant
examiner, grant the student an exemption from taking an exam if he/she demonstrates
that he/she previously:
1. Either passed an exam for a university or higher professional education programme
which was similar in terms of content and level or gained sufficient knowledge and
skills relevant to the exam concerned, either through work or professional experience.
2. An exemption may only pertain to an entire course and not a part thereof.
3. At most 60 credits for the programme may be earned based on the exemptions
granted.
BSc EER Student Handbook 2020-2021
120
4. The bachelor’s thesis is excluded from this exemption option.
5. The Board of Examiners will not grant any exemption based on exams passed by a
student outside the programme during the period in which the student was barred by
the Board of Examiners from taking exams for the programme because of fraud.
6. The same period of validity applies to exemptions as to exam results.
Article 5.15 Fraud
1. ‘Fraud’, including ‘plagiarism’, means actions or omissions by a student which make
it impossible in whole or in part to properly evaluate his/her knowledge, understanding and skills. Allowing and/or enabling other students to engage in fraud is also
considered fraud under these regulations.
2. ‘Plagiarism’ means the presentation of ideas or words from one’s own or someone
else’s sources without proper acknowledgment of the sources.
3. If the Board of Examiners determines that a student has engaged in fraud with
respect to an exam or a part thereof, the Board of Examiners can take appropriate
measures.
4. In serious cases of fraud, the Board of Examiners can propose to UM’s Executive
Board that the student(s) concerned be permanently deregistered from the
programme.
5. The Rules and Regulations include further provisions about what constitutes fraud
and which disciplinary measures the Board of Examiners can impose.
Article 5.15a Invalid exam
If an exam involves irregularities that make it impossible to accurately assess a
candidate’s knowledge, insight and skills, the Board of Examiners may declare the
exam invalid for the examinee and/or a group of examinees.
Article 5.16 Unsuitability (Iudicium Abeundi)
1. In exceptional cases and after careful consideration of the interests involved, the
Board of Examiners or the Dean/the Faculty Board may ask the executive board to
terminate or, as the case may be, refuse the enrolment of a student in a programme,
if that student, through her/his behaviour or opinions ventured, has demonstrated
his/her unsuitability for the practice of one or more professions for which s/he is
trained by the programme s/he follows, or, as the case may be, for the practical
preparation for the practice of the profession.
2. The relevant clauses of Maastricht University’s Enrolment Provisions apply.
Section 6 | Examination
Article 6.1 Examination
1. The Board of Examiners determines the result and date of the examination and
issues the certificate as referred to in Article 6.3 as soon as the student has satisfied
the requirements for the examination programme.
2. Prior to determining the result of the examination, the Board of Examiners may
conduct their own investigation of the student’s knowledge regarding one or more
components or aspects of the programme if and insofar as the results of the
relevant exams/assessments give reason to do this.
3. To pass the examination, the student must pass all components referred to in
Article 3.14.
4. To pass the examination and receive the certificate, the student must also have
been registered for the programme during the period that the exams were taken.
BSc EER Student Handbook 2020-2021
121
5. A certificate may only be issued after it has been shown that the student has
satisfied all the obligations, including paying the tuition fees.
6. The last day of the month in which the student satisfied all the examination
obligations will be considered the examination date (graduation date).
7. Students who have passed the examination and who are entitled to the issuance
of a certificate may, stating reasons, ask the Board of Examiners not to do this yet.
This request must be submitted at least one month before the final assignment is
turned in or the final exam is taken.
The Board of Examiners in any event grants the request:
• if the student is selected by the faculty for a double degree, an extracurricular
internship or an extracurricular exchange, or
• if the student holds or will hold a board position for which at least nine months
of financial support is awarded from the profiling fund or holds or will hold an
‘INKOM’ board position.
 The Board of Examiners may grant the request if refusal would result in an
exceptional case of extreme unfairness because of the fact that the student
concerned could not have taken the automatic graduation into account when he/
she was planning his/her study.
Article 6.2 Degree
Students who have passed the examination will be awarded the degree ‘Bachelor of
Science in Data Science & Knowledge Engineering’.
Article 6.3 Certificate and statements
1. As proof that the examination was passed, the Board of Examiners issues a
certificate, after it has been stated by or on behalf of UM’s Executive Board that the
procedural requirements for receiving the certificate have been met. The certificate
is based on the model that UM’s Executive Board has adopted. One certificate will
be issued per programme, even if the student completes several programmes.
2. The certificate that the examination has been passed also indicates:
a. the name of the institution;
b. the name of the programme;
c. the examination components;
d. (if applicable) the right to practice a specific profession which is related to the
certificate;
e. the degree awarded;
f. the date on which the programme was most recently accredited or was subjected
to the new programme test.
3. Students who are entitled to the issuance of a certificate may, stating reasons, ask
the Board of Examiners not to do this yet (pursuant to Article 6.1(7)).
4. The certificate is signed by the chair of the Board of Examiners and the dean of the
faculty.
5. The certificate includes a list of the examination components.
6. The Board of Examiners includes a diploma supplement as referred to in Article
7.11(4) of the Act with the certificate. This diploma supplement is based on the
model adopted by UM’s Executive Board, which is in compliance with the agreed
European standard format.
7. The Board of Examiners may award the ‘cum laude’ or ‘summa cum laude’
designation in accordance with the provisions in the Rules and Regulations.
8. Students who have passed more than one exam and who cannot be issued a
certificate will upon request, receive a statement issued by the Board of Examiners
which at least indicates the exams which they passed.
BSc EER Student Handbook 2020-2021
122
Article 6.4 Grade point average (GPA)
The diploma supplement referred to in Article 6.3(7) indicates the final grade point
average (GPA) as specified in the Rules and Regulations, to provide a reflection of the
student’s academic performance.
Article 6.5 Honours programme certificate
1. If one of the honours programmes referred to in Articles 3.11 or 3.12 is successfully
completed, a separate certificate indicating this will be issued in addition to the
one referred to in Article 6.3. The separate certificate is based on the model that
UM’s Executive Board has adopted.
2. To receive this certificate, the student must, in addition to the requirements for the
regular bachelor’s examination, satisfy the condition that the student has not been
engaged in fraud with respect to an exam or a part thereof or has not been
suspended due to other misconduct.
3. The Board of Examiners decides whether the student has satisfied all the specific
requirements of the honours programme and can impose additional conditions in
the Rules and Regulations.
Article 6.6 Right of appeal
Within six weeks after the decision by the examiner and the board of examiners is
announced, the student may appeal this decision to UM’s Complaint Service Point.
The appeal must be signed, must include a date and the name and address of the
party lodging the appeal, must indicate the grounds for the appeal and, if possible,
must include a copy of the decision being appealed.
Section 7 | Study Guidance and Advice
Article 7.1 Study progress administration
The faculty records the students’ individual study results and makes them available
through the Student Portal.
Article 7.2 Study guidance
1. The faculty will provide for the introduction and study guidance for students
registered for the programme, which also includes orientating them regarding
possible study paths in and outside the study programme
2. The study guidance includes:
a. an introduction during the first week of the first semester of the first academic
year;
b. assignment of a mentor for the first year in the bachelor’s programme;
c. group and individual advice on possible study paths in and outside the
programme, partly with a view to the professional options after the master’s
programme and opportunities for immediately entering the labour market after
obtaining the bachelor’s diploma;
d. group and individual advice on study skills, study planning and choices of
continuing study paths;
e. offering referrals and help if the student experiences problems during the study;
f. offering referrals for a more appropriate study programme to students who
deregister for the programme before 1 February of the year of initial registration;
g. giving a (negative) binding study advice (BSA) on the continuation of studies.
The Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering
(DKE) foccusses its attention to the bachelor’s programme
in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence as well to
the master’s in Artificial Intelligence and in
Data Science for Decision Making.
BSc EER
Article 7.3 Study advice for the propaedeutic phase
1. At the end of the first year of registration for the propaedeutic phase of the
bachelor’s programme, the (negative) binding study advice (BSA) is issued by the BSA
Committee on behalf of the Dean to each student regarding continuation or not of
the programme.
2. Subject to the provisions in the first paragraph, the BSA Committee on behalf of the
Dean may issue the advice to the student as long as the student has not passed the
exams related to the propaedeutic phase programme components.
Article 7.4 Standards
1. At the end of the first year of registration of the bachelor’s programme, the student
must have earned at least 45 credits of the first course year.
2. When determining the number of credits obtained as referred to in paragraph 7.4.1
all credits obtained in the 1st year are included, except those for exemptions.
Article 7.5 Negative binding study advice (nBSA)
1. If the advice referred to in Article 7.3 is negative, the advice also entails a rejection
for the bachelor’s programme.
2. The rejection referred to in paragraph 1 is binding and means that the student
cannot register for the bachelor’s programme for the next 6 academic years.
3. The nBSA is issued to a student who was registered for the full-time programme at
any time during the first academic year and who obtained less than 45 credits at the
end of the academic year concerned.
4. Students who apply to deregister before 1 February of the first year of registration
will not be issued with a study advice as referred to in Article 7.3.1. If a student
re-registers in a subsequent academic year, the advice referred to in Article 7.3.1 will
be issued in the next academic year based on the credits obtained in that academic
year and in accordance with the regulations applicable to that year.
5. Before the nBSA is issued, the student will be given the opportunity to be heard by
the BSA Committee.
Article 7.6 Procedure
1. No later than in the month of March of the first academic year, a student who has
earned less than 24 credits at that time is given a written warning.
2. The warning indicates the period within which the study results must be improved.
3. In the month of August of the first academic year, students meriting negative
binding study advice are given written notice that the BSA Committee intends to
issue this advice to them.
4. Before the nBSA is issued, the student will be given the opportunity to be heard. The
student will be informed of this in the notice referred to in paragraph 3. The hearings
will take place in mid-August. A minimum of two members of the BSA Committee
will attend the hearing.
5. The study adviser is informed which students merit negative binding study advice.
The study adviser may, upon request or otherwise, make a recommendation to the
BSA Committee.
6. After the student has been heard, the BSA Committee will determine whether to
issue the nBSA to the student.
7. The student receives written notice of the nBSA decision by 31 August at the latest.
8. The written notice is signed by the Chair of the BSA Committee.
9. An appeal against the nBSA decision may be lodged with UM’s Complaint Service
Point within six weeks of the date on which the decision was announced.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
124
BSc EER
Article 7.7 Personal circumstances
1. In issuing the study advice, the BSA Committee takes the personal circumstances
referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article into account.
2. Personal circumstances which may be considered include:
a. Illness on the part of the student concerned;
b. physical, sensory or other impairments which the student concerned has;
c. pregnancy on the part of the student concerned;
d. special family circumstances;
e. administrative activities as referred to in Article 2.1(1) under (e), (f) and (g) of the
Implementation Decree for the Act 2008 [Uitvoeringsbesluit WHW 2008].
f. participation in top-level sport;
g. circumstances other than those referred to in subparagraphs a. to f. which, if they
were not to be honoured by the faculty board, would result in excessive unfairness.
3. To ensure that the student receives the best possible support, he/she must notify the
study adviser of the personal circumstances as soon as possible.
Article 7.7b
1. If it is impossible to issue advice on the student’s suitability for the programme due
to personal circumstances that occurred in the first year, contrary to Article 7.5 this
advice may be postponed to a later moment during the propaedeutic phase. An
adapted standard may be used for the student in question.
2. If the advice is postponed, a BSA will be issued by the end of the following year of
registration in the programme. The postponed advice will be positive if the (adapted)
BSA standard is met. The student will receive a negative BSA if he/she has not
achieved the (adapted) BSA standard.
3. At the student’s request, the BSA Committee will take personal circumstances into
account when deciding to issue a BSA. This decision will also be based on the
student’s study behaviour, agreements and/or study plan made with the student
adviser, the time at which the personal circumstances were reported and the study
results achieved at the end of the first year of study.
Article 7.8 Hardship clause
In exceptional cases in which application of the study advice rules would lead to
unreasonable treatment or serious unfairness, the faculty board can deviate from the
stated regulations in the student’s favour.
Section 8 | Transitional and Final Provisions
Article 8.1 Amendments
1. Amendments to these regulations may be adopted in a separate decision by the
faculty board, after a recommendation and consent from the programme committee
and after consent from or consultation with the faculty council.
2. An amendment in these regulations will not pertain to the current academic year,
unless the interests of the students will not reasonably be harmed as a result.
3. In addition, amendments may not affect, to the students’ detriment, a decision
regarding a student which has been taken by the Board of Examiners pursuant to
these regulations.
Article 8.2 Notice
1. The faculty board ensures that proper notice is given of these regulations, the rules
Student Handbook 2020-2021
125
BSc EER
and regulations adopted by the board of examiners, and any changes to these
documents, by, for example, placing such notice on the faculty website and/or the
Student Portal.
2. Any interested party may obtain a copy of the documents referred to in the first
paragraph from the Student Affairs office.
Article 8.2a Evaluation
The Faculty Board will ensure that the education of the programme is regularly
evaluated, assessing at least – for the purpose of monitoring and if necessary adapting
the student workload – the amount of time students need to complete their duties as
set out therein.
Article 8.3 Unforeseen cases/safety net scheme
1. In cases not covered or not clearly covered by these regulations, decisions are taken by
or on behalf of the faculty board, after it has consulted with the Board of Examiners.
2. In individual cases in which application of the Education and Examination Regulations,
except for the study advice rules, would lead to manifestly unreasonable results, the
Board of Examiners can deviate from the stated regulations in the student’s favour.
Article 8.4 Effective date
This Regulation will come into force on 1 September 2020 and will apply
for the academic year 2020/2021.
Adopted by the faculty board on May 19, 2020.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
126
BSc EER
Appendix 1 | Blocks with limited capacity (see Article 4.5)
Block Faculty Number of participants Offered in semester
2.1-3.6 FSE/DKE t.b.a. - KE@Work Year 2 and 3
2.1-3.6 FSE/DKE t.b.a. - MaRBLe 2.0 Year 2 and 3
3.1-3.3 FSE/DKE t.b.a. - Exchange programme Semester 1 of year 3
3.1-3.3 FSE/DKE t.b.a. - Minor Entrepreneurship Semester 1 of year 3
3.1-3.6 FSE/DKE t.b.a. - Educational Minor Year 3
Appendix 2 | Equivalent pre-university education
 A student that holds a non-Dutch diploma that is equivalent to the Dutch VWO diploma
is admissible to the bachelor programme in Data Science and Knowledge Engineering in
the following cases
• Belgian diplomas: ASO.
• German diplomas: Abiturzeugnis or an equivalent pre-university high-school diploma
with a sufficient amount of Math education.
• Other countries: A pre-university high-school diploma equivalent to the Dutch VWO
diploma with a sufficient amount of math education (see list on the DKE website).
 If a student’s diploma is not included in the list on the website, it must be evaluated
first.
Appendix 3 | Regulations for exchange programmes to study abroad
 1. Components attained in connection with an exchange programme adopted by the faculty
board may be incorporated into the examination for the programme for which the student
is registered.
2. In principle, a student pursuing part of his/her studies in a foreign country does this as part
of the DKE’s exchange programme at one of its exchange partners.
3. Studies in connection with the exchange programme constitute part of the studies at UM
4. The certificate may not be issued until the exchange programme has been completed and
the results in the foreign country have been incorporated. The results will be taken into
account for classification on the same basis as the results attained in the faculty.
5. In connection with the requirements regarding the level and content of the examination
for the programme concerned, several conditions apply to incorporation. The Board of
Examiners assesses whether a component may be incorporated into the examination.
Incorporation is only possible with the Board of Examiners’ permission. The following
conditions must be satisfied:
 a. the component is academic in nature;
 b. in terms of content, the component does not overlap with other examination
components (Article 3.6 of the Education and Examination Regulations for Bachelor’s
Programmes);
 c. the component was attained in connection with an exchange programme, except for the
situation described below;
 d. the student requested written permission for incorporation beforehand, in principle, by
submitting a request with appendices to the Student Affairs Office, which forwarded the
information to the Board of Examiners;
 e. the student will submit additional information to the Board of Examiners upon request.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
127
6. Point 2 may be deviated from if the student has good substantive reasons for studying in a
foreign country at a university, which is not an exchange partner. Whether a foreign
university is an exchange partner during the current year may be ascertained in the
student handbook. The following procedure applies in such a situation:
 • The student must timely submit (by letter or e-mail) a written request, stating reasons, to
the Study Adviser. In addition to the student’s personal and study progress information,
the request must include information about the university where the student wishes to
study, as well as about the student’s substantive reasons for the request. These reasons
must relate to the student’s own programme.
 • The request is assessed by the Director of Studies. In this assessment, the level and the
available courses of the university concerned are compared to the exchange partners’; the
Director of Studies does not provide a judgment about the student’s specific choice of
subject is not be provided, but only about general questions regarding the level and so
forth.
 • If the judgment about the university (regarding its level or otherwise) is favourable, the
Study Adviser will notify the student and the Board of Examiners. The student will then
follow the normal exchange programme procedure and will also follow the normal
approval procedure with the Board of Examiners for incorporation of subjects.
All costs involved for studying at a non-exchange partner are on behalf of the student.
7. The following rules apply to incorporation by the Board of Examiners of results attained in
foreign countries:
 a. results must be provided to the Board of Examiners through clear, original written
notices by the university concerned. In addition to personal information about the
student and information about the university, these notices should preferably include
the following information: subject code and name; subject level; subject study load; and
exam date and result;
 b. incorporation will only be possible if there has been a sufficient assessment. A mere
statement that the subject was ‘taken’ or words to that effect will not be enough. A
result which constitutes a pass in the country concerned will also be considered a pass
here, and a fail in a foreign country will also be considered a fail here;
 c. the study load conferred by the foreign university will be followed here without
adjustment. If, for example, 5 ECTS are conferred by the university concerned for the
subject, the subject will also count for 5 ECTS at the faculty, regardless of how difficult or
easy the subject was for the student.
 d. if the study load in the foreign country is not expressed in ECTS units but in other units,
the Board of Examiners will convert the study load into ECTS units. The conversion will be
based on the study load for a full year of study or a full programme in relation to a study
load of 60 ECTS for a year at UM or 180 ECTS for a three-year bachelor’s programme.
8. Study delay caused by the study abroad is the responsibility of the student.
9. Insofar as the Education and Examination Regulations and this appendix do not address
matters relating to incorporation of components attained elsewhere, the Board of
Examiners will decide on the matter.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
128 BSc EER
BSc EER
Appendix 4 | Accountability for the language of instruction
 The choice for the language of instruction of the programme is in line with the UM
Code of Conduct on language in accordance with the Dutch Higher Education and
Research Act (WHW) art. 7.2.
 Because of the specific educational nature and profile of the programme, teaching
and examinations are conducted in English. This guarantees the quality of education,
because:
• The content of the programme has an international orientation and focus.
Language of main course materials (handbooks, papers, tools) discussing or
supporting the latest advances in AI or Data Science are in English.
• The academic community is internationally oriented and the staff is international.
Project-Centred Learning implements the international classroom concept, which
requires a common international language. Students participate in international
collaboration by exchange programmes to study abroad, or conduct their thesis at
companies/institutes where English is the lingua franca. There is a staff exchange
with RWTH Aachen, such that the courses on Parallel Programming and Large Scale
IT and Cloud Computing in the programme are coordinated by RWTH Aachen.
• The labour market demand is internationally oriented (English speaking). Alumni
typically end up in jobs at companies/institutes where English is the main language.
• The student intake and current population is internationally diverse and English is
the common language (26% Dutch; 74% non-Dutch in 2018-2019).
Student Handbook 2020-2021
129
MSc EER
5.2 Master’s programmes Artificial Intelligence and
Data Science for Decision Making
Section 1 | General provisions
Article 1.1 Applicability of the regulations
Article 1.2 Definitions
Section 2 | Admission Master Programme
Article 2.1 Admission
Article 2.2 Eligibility for admission
Article 2.3 Certificate of admission
Article 2.4 Language requirement with non-Dutch diplomas
Article 2.5 Board of Admission
Article 2.6 Admission test dates
Article 2.7 Bridging Programme
Section 3 | Content and Structure of the Programme
Article 3.1 Programmes
Article 3.2a Objectives of the programme Artificial Intelligence
Article 3.2b Objectives of the programme Data Science for Decision Making
Article 3.2c Qualifications of the programme Artificial Intelligence
Article 3.2d Qualifications of the programme Data Science for Decision Making
Article 3.3 Form of the programme
Article 3.4 Language of instruction
Article 3.5 Communications and announcement of decisions
Article 3.6 Study load
Article 3.7 Content of the programme
Article 3.8 Electives
Article 3.9 Flexible programme and flexible master’s
Article 3.11 Study Abroad
Article 3.12 The examination
Section 4 | Education
Article 4.1 Courses; composition; actual design
Article 4.2 Prior knowledge
Article 4.3 Course registration
Article 4.4 Attendance and best-efforts obligation
Article 4.5 Participation and priority rules
Article 4.6 Practical training
Section 5 | Assessment
Article 5.1 General
Article 5.2 Marks
Article 5.3 Order of exams
Article 5.4 Scheduling and frequency of the exams
Article 5.5 Registration for exams
Article 5.6 Form of the exams
Article 5.7 Oral exams
Article 5.8 Assessments in exceptional cases
Student Handbook 2020-2021
130
MSc EER
Article 5.9 Practicals and written assignments
Article 5.10 Internships
Article 5.11 Determination and announcement of exam result
Article 5.12 Right of inspection
Article 5.13 Period of validity
Article 5.14 Retention period for exams
Article 5.15 Exemption
Article 5.16 Fraud
Article 5.16a Invalid exam
Article 5.17 Unsuitability (Iudicium Abeundi)
Section 6 | Examination
Article 6.1 Examination
Article 6.2 Degree
Article 6.3 Certificate and statements
Article 6.4 Grade point average (GPA)
Article 6.5 Right of appeal
Section 7 | Study Guidance
Article 7.1 Study progress administration
Article 7.2 Study guidance
Section 8 | Transitional and Final Provisions
Article 8.1 Amendments
Article 8.2 Notice
Article 8.2a Evaluation
Article 8.3 Unforeseen cases/safety net scheme
Article 8.4 Effective date
Appendices
Appendix 1 Content
Appendix 2 Courses with limited capacity (art. 4.5)
Appendix 4 Regulations for exchange programmes to study abroad
Appendix 5 Accountability for the language of instruction
Section 1 | General provisions
Article 1.1 Applicability of the regulations
These regulations apply to the education and exams and examinations of each of the
two master’s programmes Artificial Intelligence and Data Science for Decision
Making, each referred to as ‘the programme’ in the remainder of this document. The
programme is offered by the Faculty of Science and Engineering, hereafter called the
faculty, at the Department of Data Science & Knowledge Engineering, hereafter to be
called the department.
The regulations were adopted by the Faculty Board and the School Board of the
School of Information Technology, after advice and consent of the programme
committee and after the consent from or in consultation with the faculty council. The
regulations will take effect on 1 September 2020 for the 2020-2021 academic year.
These regulations also apply to students from other programmes, faculties or
Student Handbook 2020-2021
131
MSc EER
institutions of higher education, insofar as they follow components of the
programme to which these Education and Examination Regulations apply.
For components of the programme that students follow at another degree
programme, faculty or institution of higher education, the Education and
Examination Regulations for the other programme, faculty or institution apply to the
component in question.
Article 1.2 Definitions
In these regulations, the following definitions apply:
a. The Act: the Higher Education and Scientific Research Act (Wet op het hoger
onderwijs en wetenschappelijk onderzoek);
b. Student: a person who is registered at the university for education and/or to take
exams and the examination of the programme;
c. Course: a study unit of the programme within the meaning of the Act;
d. Course year: year 1 or year 2 of the programme;
e. Academic year: the period from 1 September of a calendar year up to and
including 31 August of the following calendar year;
f. Programme: each of the master’s programmes referred to in Article 1.1 of these
regulations, consisting of a coherent whole of study units;
g. Exam: a component of the examination as referred to in Article 7.10 of the Act;
h. Practical: skill exercise as referred to in Article 7.13(2)(d) of the Act, in one of the
following forms:
- writing a thesis;
- carrying out a (group) project;
- performing a research assignment;
- developing a software program;
- writing a paper, creating a technological design or performing another written
assignment;
- participating in field work or a field trip;
- completing an internship;
- participating in an activity intended to develop certain skills
i. Project Skill: practical training associated as part of the project.
j. Examination: the final examination for the master’s programme;
k. Credit: a unit expressed in ECTS credits, with one credit equalling 28 hours of
study;
l. Board of Examiners: the board referred to in Article 7.12 of the Act;
m. Board of Admission: the board responsible for judging the admissibility of the
candidate to the programme;
n. Programme Committee: the representation and advisory body that carries out the
duties described in Article 9.18 and 9.38c of the Act.
o. Examiner: the person designated by the Board of Examiners to administer exams
and to determine the results of such exams;
p. Faculty Board: the faculty board referred to in Article 9.12 of the Act;
q. Semester: part of an academic year, either starting first of September and running
for 20 educational weeks, or starting first of February running for 21 educational
weeks.
r. Block: part of a semester during which educational activities take place;
s. AI: Artificial Intelligence;
t. DSDM: Data Science for Decision Making;
u. KE: Data Science & Knowledge Engineering;
v. DKE: Department of Data Science & Knowledge Engineering;
Student Handbook 2020-2021
132
MSc EER
w. UM: Maastricht University;
x. Student handbook: the programme guide which includes further details about
programme specific provisions and information.
y. Non-EU request: A request from either 1) a person that does not hold the nationality
of a European Union Country, 2) a person that is not a resident of a European Union
country, 3) a person that applies to the program based on a diploma that is not
issued by an educational institution from a European Union country.
The other terms have the meaning given to them by the Act.
Section 2 | Admission Master Programmes
Article 2.1 Admission
Candidates who have obtained either:
• the Bachelor of Science degree in Data Science and Knowledge Engineering at the
UM, or
• the Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science at Hasselt University,
• the Bachelor of Science degree in scientific programing at Aachen University are
eligible for admission to the programme.
Article 2.2 Eligibility for admission
Those students that did not obtain the degree referred to in Article 2.1, but who satisfy
the requirements referred to in Article 2.3 and have received a certificate of admission,
are eligible for admission to the programme.
Article 2.3 Certificate of admission
The certificate of admission referred to in Article 2.2 will be issued if the candidate
concerned satisfies the following admission requirements;
Degree
1. A Bachelor of Science degree in Data Science and Knowledge Engineering or an
equivalent diploma in a related field to Data Science and Knowledge Engineering.
2. Students having a professional Bachelor of Science degree in Data Science and
Knowledge Engineering or a related field from a Dutch HBO study or equivalent, and
successfully completed a tailored bridging programme as referred to in Article 2.7.
Additional requirements
• Candidates must provide a curriculum vitae and write a motivation essay of 2 pages
in A4 format.
• Candidates with a non-EU/EEA diploma should show proof of English proficiency
referred to in Article 2.4.
• The Board of Admission can additionally request as proof of analytical writing and
quantitative reasoning abilities, a satisfactory Graduate Record Examination (GRE)
score. A satisfactory GRE score implies a score of 4 or higher on the analytical writing
section and 80% in the quantitative reasoning section (In case of a lower score, the
Board of Admission can still decide that a candidate is admissible).
Article 2.3a Certificate of admission
The Board of Admission can approve specific bachelor programmes at Applied
universities, for which students that completed specific components, consisting of a
bridging minor in collaboration with DKE, are admissible to the Master programme.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
133
MSc EER
Conditions are subject to approval by the Board of Admission and the bridging minor
subject to approval by the Board of Examiners.
Article 2.4 Language requirement with non-Dutch diplomas
a. Holders of a non-Dutch diploma can only register if they have met the minimum
English language requirement corresponding to IELTS (international English
Language Testing System) with a score of at least 6.5
b. The requirement referred to under (a) is met if the person concerned has obtained
one of the following diplomas or certificates:
• a completed bachelor’s or master’s study programme where the language of
instruction is English;
• an International or European Baccalaureate, a US high school diploma or UK GCE
A-levels, or
• Can demonstrate sufficient proficiency in English, for example through English
taught courses, internships or work experience in an English environment, or
• can submit one of the following language test certificates.
• IELTS (6.5 minimum)
• TOEFL Paper-based test (575 minimum)
• TOEFL Internet test (90 minimum)
• TOEFL Computer test (232 minimum)
• TOEIC (720 minimum) the modules ‘listening and reading’ and ‘speaking and
writing’ must be completed successfully
• Cambridge [Advanced (CAE) Grade C, First Certificate in English (FCE) Grade A,
First Certificate in English (FCE) Grade B or
• similar accredited certification
Article 2.5 Board of Admission
1. The Board of Admission for the programmes is responsible for assessing eligibility
for admission and issuing the certificate of admission to the programme. The
Board of Admission consists of three members appointed from the academic staff
responsible for the programme curriculum, under which one chair.
2. The student adviser for the programme concerned is appointed as an adviser, also
the Secretary.
3. The Faculty Board appoints the members after consulting with the Programme
Committee.
Article 2.6 Admissions test dates
1. The admissions test takes place twice a year.
2. A request for admission to a programme must be submitted to the Board of
Admission before 1 May, for a non-EU request, or before 1 July, for an EU request.
3. In special cases, the Board of Admission can take up a request submitted after the
closing date referred to in paragraph 2.
4. The Board of Admission decides on the request as soon as possible.
5. The candidate will be admitted subject to the condition that, by the relevant start
date for the programme, he/she will have satisfied the requirements stated in
Article 2.3 and 2.4 regarding knowledge, understanding and skills, as evidenced by
the certificates for the programmes taken by him/her.
Article 2.7 Bridging Programme
1. Students having a professional Bachelor of Science degree in Data Science &
Knowledge Engineering or a related field (e.g., Mathematics, Computer Science or
Student Handbook 2020-2021
134
MSc EER
Artificial Intelligence) from a Dutch HBO study or equivalent have the possibility to
meet the requirements as referred to in Article 2.3 by successfully completing a
tailored bridging programme.
2. The bridging is composed of key courses taken from the second and third year of the
Bachelor of Science in Data Science and Knowledge Engineering together worth 30
ECTS and decided upon by the Board of Examiners after advice of the Board of
Admission.
3. The bridging programme must be successfully completed within 12 months. After
this term has expired or in case of unsatisfactory participation either in a qualitative
or quantitative way, he/she may be debarred from further participation.
Section 3 | Content and Structure of the Programme
Article 3.1 Programmes
The master’s programme is one of the two following programmes:
1. the Artificial Intelligence programme;
2. the Data Science for Decision Making programme;
Article 3.2a Objectives of the programme Artificial Intelligence
The goals of the Master’s programme Artificial Intelligence are as follows:
1. A university education within the framework of Project-Centred Learning (PCL)
and the UM teaching philosophy.
2. Added depth to the student’s knowledge in the chosen academic field.
3. The opportunity to broaden his/her education into other disciplines.
4. Specialised knowledge, skills and understanding in the field of Artificial Intelligence.
5. A preparation for research programmes in the field of Artificial Intelligence.
The programme includes sufficient aspects furthering the student’s university
education, in particular regarding:
• independent academic thinking and conduct;
• academic communication in the English language; and
• application of the knowledge gained in the discipline in a broader societal context.
Specifically, the Master’s programme in Artificial Intelligence provides a thorough
knowledge of algorithms, methods, and techniques from the fields of artificial
intelligence and data science, such as agent technology, search techniques, machine
learning, information retrieval & text mining, and computer games to model, analyse
and implement intelligent software in a variety of contexts.
Article 3.2b Objectives of the programme Data Science for Decision Making
The goals of the Master’s programme Data Science for Decision Making at DKE are as
follows:
1. A university education within the framework of Project-Centred Learning (PCL)
and the UM teaching philosophy.
2. Added depth to the student’s knowledge in the chosen academic field.
3. The opportunity to broaden his/her education into other disciplines.
4. Specialised knowledge, skills and understanding in the field of Data Science,
Applied Mathematics and Operations Research.
5. A preparation for researcher programmes in the fields of Data Science, Applied
Mathematics and Operations Research.
The programme includes sufficient aspects furthering the student’s university
education, in particular regarding:
Student Handbook 2020-2021
135
MSc EER
• independent academic thinking and conduct;
• academic communication in the English language; and
• application of the knowledge gained in the discipline in a broader societal context.
Specifically, the Master’s programme in Data Science for Decision Making provides a
thorough knowledge of relevant algorithms, methods, and techniques from the fields
of Data Science, Applied Mathematics, Operations Research, Artificial Intelligence and
Machine Learning to model, analyse, optimise and implement (intelligent) software
in a variety of contexts.
Article 3.2c Qualifications of the programme Artificial Intelligence
The qualifications of the programme Artificial Intelligence are as follows:
I. Knowledge and understanding
The student/graduate demonstrates knowledge and understanding in a field of study
that builds upon and supersedes the Bachelor degree. Knowledge, understanding,
and abilities are typically at a level at which the student/graduate is able to
formulate a feasible research plan in one’s own specialisation.
Qualifications:
1. Advanced understanding of key areas in Artificial Intelligence, in particular in the
subfields of machine learning, agent technology and search techniques.
2. Specialist knowledge of at least one of the key areas in Artificial Intelligence, up to a
level that the Master can appreciate the forefront of research in that field.
II. Applying knowledge and understanding
Students/graduates can apply their knowledge and understanding in a manner that
shows a scientific approach to their work or vocation. They are able to handle
complex and ill-defined problems for which it is not a priori known if there is an
appropriate solution, they know how to acquire the necessary information to solve
the sub-problems involved, and they know how to proceed with problems for which
there is no standard or reliable route to the solution.
Qualifications:
3. The ability to formulate a project plan for an open problem in a field related to
Artificial Intelligence in general and to one’s own specialisation in particular.
4. The ability to judge the feasibility of a proposal to lead to a solution or design as
specified.
5. The ability to contribute autonomously and with minimal supervision to an
interdisciplinary project team and to profit from the abilities, the knowledge, and
the contributions of other team members.
6. The ability to choose, apply, formulate, and validate models, theories, hypotheses,
and ideas from the key areas of Artificial Intelligence.
7. The ability to submit an argument in the exact sciences (or humanities) to critical
appraisal and to incorporate its essence in the solution of Artificial Intelligence
problems.
8. The ability to translate academic knowledge and expertise into social,
professional, economic, and ethical contexts.
9. Awareness of, and responsibility concerning, the ethical, normative and social
consequences of developments in science and technology, particularly resulting
from original contributions.
III. Making judgements
The student/graduate is able to formulate an opinion or course of action on the basis
of incomplete, limited and in part unreliable information.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
136
MSc EER
Qualifications:
10. Competence in the search and critical processing of all sources of information that
helps to solve an open and ill-defined problem.
11. The ability to demonstrate a professional attitude conform the (international)
scientific conduct in Artificial Intelligence.
12. The ability to provide and receive academic criticism conform the standards in
one’s own specialism of Artificial Intelligence research.
13. The ability to formulate an opinion and to make judgements that include social
and ethical responsibilities related to the application of one’s own contributions.
14. The ability to be able to judge the quality of his or her work or the work of others
from the scientific literature.
IV. Communication
The student/graduate can communicate information, ideas, problems and solutions
to audiences of specialists in (other) research areas and to a general audience.
Qualifications:
15. The student/graduate has academically appropriate communicative skills; s/he can:
1. Communicate original ideas effectively in written form,
2. Make effective oral presentations, both formally and informally, to a wide range
of audiences
3. Understand and offer constructive critiques of the presentations of others.
V. Learning skills
The student/graduate has developed those learning skills that are necessary for a
successful further career at the highest professional level. The Master is able to detect
missing knowledge and abilities and to deal with them appropriately.
Qualifications:
16. Being able to reflect upon one’s competences and knowledge and, if necessary,
being able to take the appropriate corrective action.
17. The ability to follow current (scientific) developments related to the professional
environment.
18. Showing an active attitude towards continued learning throughout a
professional career.
Article 3.2d Qualifications of the programme Data Science for Decision Making
The qualifications of the programme Data Science for Decision Making are as follows:
I. Knowledge and understanding
The student/graduate demonstrates knowledge and understanding in a field of study
that builds upon and supersedes the Bachelor degree. Knowledge, understanding,
and abilities are typically at a level at which the Master is able to formulate a feasible
research plan in one’s own specialization.
Qualifications:
1. Advanced understanding of key areas in Applied Mathematics and Data Science,
in particular in the subfields Pattern Recognition, Operations Research, Machine
Learning, and Intelligent Decision Making.
2. Specialist knowledge of at least one of the key areas in Data Science and Decision
Making, up to a level that the Master can appreciate the forefront of research in
that field.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
137
II. Applying knowledge and understanding
Students/graduates can apply their knowledge and understanding in a manner that
shows a scientific approach to their work or vocation. They are able to handle complex
and ill-defined problems for which it is not a priori known if there is an appropriate
solution, they know how to acquire the necessary information to solve the subproblems involved, and they know how to proceed with problems for which there is no
standard or reliable route to the solution.
Qualifications:
3. The ability to formulate a project plan for an open problem in a field related to Applied
Mathematics and Data Science (in general, and to one’s own specialization in particular.
4. The ability to judge the feasibility of a proposal, taking into account the availability
of data, to lead to a solution or design as specified.
5. The ability to contribute autonomously and with minimal supervision to an
interdisciplinary project team and to profit from the abilities, the knowledge, and
the contributions of other team members.
6. The ability to choose, apply, formulate, and validate models, theories, hypotheses,
and ideas from the key areas of Applied Mathematics and Operations Research.
7. The ability to transform, analyse and interpret data and to extract information
from it, using techniques from Data Science.
8. The ability to submit an argument in the Exact Sciences (or Humanities) to critical
appraisal and to incorporate its essence in the solution of problems in Applied
Mathematics and Data Science.
9. The ability to translate academic knowledge and expertise into social, professional,
economic, and ethical contexts.
10. Awareness of, and responsibility concerning, the ethical, normative and social
consequences of developments in science and technology, particularly resulting
from original contributions.
III. Making judgements
The student/graduate is able to formulate an opinion or course of action on the basis
of incomplete, limited and in part unreliable information.
Qualifications:
11. Competence in the search and critical processing of all sources of information that
helps to solve an open and ill-defined problem.
12. The ability to demonstrate a professional attitude conform the (international)
scientific conduct in Data Science for Decision Making.
13. The ability to provide and receive academic criticism conform the standards in
one’s own specialism of Applied Mathematical and Data Science research.
14. The ability to formulate an opinion and to make judgements that include social
and ethical responsibilities related to the application of one’s own contributions.
15. The ability to judge the quality of his or her work, or the work of others from the
scientific literature.
IV. Communication
The student/graduate can communicate information, ideas, problems and solutions to
audiences of specialists in (other) research areas and to a general audience.
Qualifications:
16. The Master has academically appropriate communicative skills; s/he can:
a. Communicate original ideas effectively in written form,
b. Make effective oral presentations, both formally and informally, to a wide range
of audiences
Student Handbook 2020-2021
138 MSc EER
MSc EER
c. Understand and offer constructive critiques of the presentations of others.
V. Learning skills
The student/graduate has developed those learning skills that are necessary for a
successful further career at the highest professional level. The Master is able to detect
missing knowledge and abilities and to deal with them appropriately.
Qualifications:
17. Being able to reflect upon one’s competences and knowledge and, if necessary,
being able to take the appropriate corrective action.
18. The ability to follow current (scientific) developments related to the professional
environment.
19. Showing an active attitude towards continued learning throughout a professional
career.
Article 3.3 Form of the programme
This is a full-time programme. The programme commences twice a year, in September
and February of the following calendar year.
Article 3.4 Language of instruction
1. The programme is given in English (accountability for this language of instruction
is given in Appendix 5). Components of the programme may be in Dutch or in
another common language in the EU.
2. Dutch, English, French and/or German texts may be used in the education and
exams in the programme.
Article 3.5 Communications and announcement of decisions
1. The Faculty board, the Board of Examiners, the DKE Management Team and the
examiners may use the Student Portal and email via the UM account for
communications relating to the education and examinations.
2. The Faculty Board, the Board of Examiners, the DKE Management Team and the
examiners may use the Student Portal and email through the UM account to
announce decisions.
3. The student must regularly check his/her university e-mail address, the Faculty
website and the digital learning environment. Information disseminated via
e-mail, the digital learning environment or the website will be assumed to be
known.
Article 3.6 Study load
The programme has a study load of 120 credits (ECTS), with one credit equalling 28
hours of study.
Article 3.7 Content of the Programmes
The components of the Artificial Intelligence programme are listed in Appendix 1a.
The components of the Data Science for Decision Making programme are listed in
Appendix 1b. The student’s choice of electives is subject to the Board of Examiners’
approval.
Article 3.8 Electives
The first semester of year 2 of the programme contains electives:
1. The student selects one or more components with a total study load equal to 30 ECTS.
2. The components mentioned in Appendix 1, may be chosen as electives.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
139
MSc EER
3. The student may - subject to prior approval by the Board of Examiners of the other
programme - choose to take components given by another UM department/faculty,
another Dutch university or a foreign university.
4. The Board of Examiners may withhold the approval referred to in paragraph 3. A
particular reason for withholding is if, in its judgement, the proposed elective is in
terms of content similar to components taken previously by the student and would
result in duplication. If components of the electives overlap in whole or in part, the
Board of Examiners can decide to limit the contribution of these components
towards the overall assessment by deducting of ECTS in proportion to the overlap.
5. To attain the certificate for the examination for the master’s programme, the
student must have obtained at least 78 ECTS of the educational programme
through components provided by DKE.
6. For courses passed at a higher education institute prior to the start of the master’s
programme, an exemption may only be granted on the basis of Article 5.15.
Article 3.9 Flexible programme and flexible master’s
1. A student registered for one of the faculty’s programmes may, under certain
conditions, formulate an educational programme of his/her own which is different
from the educational programme stated in Article 3.7. The composition of such a
programme must be approved beforehand by the Board of Examiners.
2. The flexible programme must have a study load of 120 credits.
Article 3.10
Article cancelled
Article 3.11 Study Abroad
1. Students can apply to study abroad for a semester, at another University with
whom Maastricht University has an Agreement of Exchange.
2. Nomination is decided on by the Board of Examiners based on study progress as
mentioned in Article 5.3.1 and motivation of the student.
3. This study abroad will take place in Semester 1 of year 2 and has a study load of 30
ECTS.
4. The selected course programme has to be approved by the Board of Examiners.
5. Further regulations can be found in Appendix 4.
Article 3.12 The examination
The examination for the master’s programme Artificial Intelligence consists of the
following components:
a. Course year 1, offered from September 2011 or later:
exams in blocks 1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.5, listed in Appendix 1a;
research projects in blocks 1.3 and 1.6.
b. Course year 2, offered September 2011 or later:
internship, or research project, or electives, with a total of 30 ECTS;
master thesis, with a total of 30 ECTS
The examination for the master’s programme Data Science for Decision Making
consists of the following components:
a. Course year 1, offered September 2011 or later:
 exams in blocks 1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.5, listed in Appendix 1b;
research projects in blocks 1.3 and 1.6.
b. Course year 2, started September 2011 or later:
Student Handbook 2020-2021
140
MSc EER
internship, or research project, or electives, with a total of 30 ECTS;
master thesis, with a total of 30 ECTS.
Section 4 | Education
Article 4.1 Courses; composition; actual design
1. For the programme components, courses are given with the study load stated in
Article 3.6.
2. The education is given in the form of classes, project groups, practical training,
lectures, individual supervision, or otherwise. On average, the student has 13
hours of face-to-face time per week, but this can differ per period. For further
details, please see the student handbook.
3. The educational programme includes 41 weeks per year. During this period
students are expected to be available for educational activities.
Article 4.2 Prior knowledge
The desired prior knowledge to successfully participate in each course is indicated in
the student handbook.
Article 4.3 Course registration
The student may participate in a course after he/she has timely registered for it
through the Student Portal.
Article 4.4 Attendance and best-efforts obligation
1. Project skill trainings and project meetings are mandatory. In addition, each
student is expected to participate actively in doing tasks with respect to the
project and to cooperate actively with their group in order to successfully finish
the project.
2. Students who have not met the requirements in paragraph 1 and/or students
whose absence or inactivity during the project has been marked as inexcusable by
the project coordinator and/or students that have a substandard contribution to
the group work will not receive a pass for the project concerned.
3. Attendance and participation in other education activities may be part of an exam
when announced in the student handbook or student portal and prior approval of
the Board of Examiners.
4. For resits that are offered for practical assignments, the examiner can require that
the student has made a reasonable attempt at the regular opportunity for that
assignment. This requirement must be communicated upfront to the students on
student portal. The Board of Examiners can impose further restrictions in the Rules
and Regulations.
Article 4.5 Participation
The blocks mentioned in Appendix 2 are available to a limited number of students
enrolled at UM, provided that the students enrolled in the programme will anyhow
be placed in the blocks belonging to the compulsory part of their programme, in
compliance with the periods the faculty designated to them. For blocks belonging to
the optional parts of the master’s programme, most places will be reserved for
students enrolled in the programme.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
141
MSc EER
Article 4.6 Practical training
Some courses indicated in Appendix 1 include practical training for which additional
regulations apply as specified in the Rules and Regulations.
Section 5 | Assessment
Article 5.1 General
1. During a course, the student will be tested for academic training and the extent to
which the student has sufficiently achieved the stated learning objectives.
2. The student handbook describes the achievements the students must make to
pass the course and the criteria on which the student is assessed. Any
amendments are published on student portal.
3. The Rules and Regulations describe the assessment procedure.
Article 5.2 Marks
1. Marks are awarded on a scale of 1 to 10. Whole grades are awarded to exams.
Both half and whole grades can be awarded for study components of at least 10
ECTS as well as for projects
2. The student must receive a final mark of 6.0 or higher to pass the component.
3. The highest result attained determines the final mark.
4. NG (no grade) can be assigned as a result of plagiarism or academic dishonesty; or
when assessment is incomplete and no grade can be assigned. An NG
automatically constitutes a fail and no credit is awarded.
Article 5.3 Order of exams
1. If the student obtained at least 40 ECTS of course year 1, he or she can sit exams
of course year 2.
2. If the student has obtained at least 40 credits in course year 1 and at least 60 ECTS
overall, he/she may start the master thesis in course year 2.
3. In conformance with article 7.30 paragraph 3 of the Act, the Board of Examiners
may grant a student permission to sit other exams than referred to in paragraphs
1 and 2.
4. If a student deviates from the sequence as described in paragraphs 1 and 2,
without permission from the Board of Examiners, the result of the component in
question can be declared invalid.
Article 5.4 Scheduling and frequency of the exams
1. Students can take exams twice per academic year on dates to be determined by
the Board of Examiners: once during or directly after the block (first sit for the
exam) and once before the end of the semester in question (resit option).
2. Once a student successfully passes an exam, he/she can resit the exam upon
permission from the Board of Examiners.
3. In exceptional cases, the Board of Examiners can decide that an exam may be
taken at another time than determined in accordance with the first paragraph.
Article 5.5 Registration for exams
1. The student may take an exam for a course for which he/she is registered, after
he/she has timely registered for the exam through the Student Portal.
2. If a student deviates from the conditions as described in paragraph 1, the result of
the component in question will be declared invalid.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
142
MSc EER Student Handbook 2020-2021
143
Article 5.6 Form of the exams
1. In principle, the exams are written. ‘Written exams’ also include taking exams by
computer.
2. In principle all exams and assignments with the exception of research projects are
on an individual basis, unless explicitly announced otherwise.
3. Oral exams can only take place upon prior approval by the Board of Examiners.
4. The form of the exam is announced by the examiner at the start of the block.
5. Upon request, students with a disability may take exams in a manner, which
accommodates their specific disability as much as possible. If necessary, the Board
of Examiners will obtain expert advice from the faculty’s student advisor and/or
the student dean at the Student Service Centre (SSC) before taking a decision in
such matters.
Article 5.7 Oral exams
1. Oral exams are taken only by one person at a time, unless the Board of Examiners
decides otherwise.
2. An oral exam is given by the examiner in the presence of second examiner, unless
the Board of Examiners has decided otherwise.
3. Oral exams take place in public, unless the Board of Examiners or the relevant
examiner decides otherwise in a special case.
Article 5.8 Assessments in exceptional cases
1. A participant can submit a request to the Board of Examiners for an individual
assessment. This request may be granted if the participant has not passed the
exam in question due to exceptional circumstances and not granting an individual
assessment would result in an unacceptable study delay.
2. The following criteria apply to the granting of an individual assessment for the
final component of the programme:
- It must be the final study result to be obtained.
-The study delay in case the individual assessment is not granted must be at least
one semester.
- The participant must have taken part in the last two regular exam opportunities
for the exam for which he/she is requesting another assessment.
Article 5.9 Practicals and written assignments
1. The Board of Examiners may draw up guidelines for the practicals which include
group projects and theses. The guidelines will be included in the Rules and
Regulations.
2. The master’s thesis project will be evaluated by at least two examiners (the
relevant supervisor and a second evaluator), at least two of them are affiliated
with the programme for which the student is registered.
Article 5.10 Internships
1. DKE can offer internship vacancies or the student may find a relevant internship
and DKE supervisor him/herself. For each internship, an internship proposal must
be send to the Board of Examiners for approval. .
2. The Board of Examiners appoints an examiner for the internship.
3. The student may undertake an internship supervised by DKE at most once during
the programme.
4. The Board of Examiners may formulate guidelines for internships. The guidelines
will be included in the Rules and Regulations.
MSc EER Student Handbook 2020-2021
144
Article 5.11 Determination and announcement of exam result
1. The Board of Examiners determines the standards for assessing each examination
component. The standards are included in the Rules and Regulations.
2. The examiner determines the result of a written exam within 15 working days of
the date on which it was taken and at least 10 working days before the resit, and
provides the Student Affairs Office with the necessary information to apprise the
student of the result.
3. The examiner determines the result of an oral exam within 24 hours and issues the
relevant certificate to the student. If more than one student takes the same exam
after each other, this period may be extended by up to five working days.
4. When the result of a written exam is announced, it will be indicated how the
student can inspect the exam and file an appeal as referred to in Article 6.5.
Article 5.12 Right of inspection
1. Within 10 working days of the date on which the result of a written exam, including
a computer-based exam, is announced, students may inspect their evaluated work.
2. Within the period referred to in paragraph 1, any interested party may, upon
request, inspect the questions and assignments for the written exam and, if
possible, the standards based on which it was assessed.
Article 5.13 Period of validity
1. Exams which have been passed are valid for an unlimited period. Contrary to the
above the Board of Examiners may require the participant to take an additional or
replacement exam or examination component for an exam which was passed more
than six years ago if the student’s knowledge or insight that was examined is
demonstrably outdated or the skills that were examined are demonstrably outdated.
2. If exceptional circumstances apply as referred to in Article 7.51 paragraph two of the
Act, the period of six years in paragraph one will be extended by the duration of the
financial support a student receives from the profiling fund.
3. Sub-tests and assignments that were passed within a component, which was not
passed, will lose their validity after the academic year in which they were passed
unless the Board of Examiners states otherwise.
Article 5.14 Retention period for exams
1. The exercises, answers and the evaluated work of the written tests will be retained in
paper or digital form for two years after the exam/examination result is determined.
2. The master thesis and its evaluation will be kept for at least seven years after the
evaluation.
Article 5.15 Exemption
1. The Board of Examiners may, at a student’s request and having heard the relevant
examiner, grant the student an exemption from taking an exam if he/she
demonstrates that he/she previously:
i. either passed an exam for a university or higher professional education
programme which was similar in terms of content and level or
ii. gained sufficient knowledge and skills relevant to the exam concerned, either
through work or professional experience.
2. An exemption may only pertain to an entire course and not a part thereof.
3. At most 40 credits for the programme may be earned based on the exemptions
granted.
4. The master’s thesis is excluded from this exemption option.
MSc EER Student Handbook 2020-2021
145
5. The Board of Examiners will not grant any exemption based on exams passed by a
student outside the programme during the period in which the student was barred
by the Board of Examiners from taking exams for the programme because of fraud.
6. The same period of validity applies to exemptions as to exam results.
Article 5.16 Fraud
1. ‘Fraud’, including ‘plagiarism’, means actions or omissions by a student which make it
impossible in whole or in part to properly evaluate his/her knowledge, understanding
and skills. ‘Plagiarism’ means the presentation of ideas or words from one’s own or
someone else’s sources without proper acknowledgment of the sources.
2. If the Board of Examiners determines that a student has engaged in fraud with respect
to an exam or a part thereof, the Board of Examiners can take appropriate measures.
3. In serious cases of fraud, the Board of Examiners can propose to UM’s Executive Board
that the student(s) concerned be permanently deregistered from the programme.
4. The Rules and Regulations include further provisions about what constitutes fraud and
which disciplinary measures the Board of Examiners can impose.
Article 5.16a Invalid exam
If an exam involves irregularities that make it impossible to accurately assess the
candidate’s knowledge, insight and skills, the Board of Examiners may declare the
exam invalid for both the examinee and a group of examinees.
Article 5.17 Unsuitability (Iudicium Abeundi)
1. In exceptional cases and after careful consideration of the interests involved, the
board of examination or the dean/the faculty board may ask the executive board to
terminate or, as the case may be, refuse the enrolment of a student in a programme,
if that student, through his behaviour or opinions ventured, has demonstrated his
unsuitability for the practice of one or more professions for which he is trained by
the programme he follows, or, as the case may be, for the practical preparation for
the practice of the profession.
2. The relevant clauses of Maastricht University’s Enrolment Provisions apply.
Section 6 | Examination
Article 6.1 Examination
1. The Board of Examiners determines the result and date of the examination and
issues the certificate as referred to in Article 6.3 as soon as the student has satisfied
the requirements for the examination programme.
2. Prior to determining the result of the examination, the Board of Examiners may
conduct their own investigation of the student’s knowledge regarding one or more
components or aspects of the programme if and insofar as the results of the
relevant exams give reason to do this.
3. To pass the examination, the student must pass all components referred to in
Article 3.12.
4. To pass the examination and receive the certificate, the student must also have
been registered for the programme during the period that the tests were taken.
5. A certificate may only be issued after it has been shown that the student has
satisfied all the obligations, including paying the tuition fees.
6. The last day of the month in which the student satisfied all the examination
obligations will be considered the examination date (graduation date).
7. Students who have passed the examination and who are entitled to the issuance of
a certificate may, stating reasons, ask the Board of Examiners not to do this yet. This
request must be submitted at least one month before the final assignment is
turned in or the final test is taken.
The Board of Examiners in any event grants the request
- if the student is selected by the faculty for a double degree, an extracurricular
internship or an extracurricular exchange, or
- if the student holds or has held/will hold a board position for which of at least
nine months of financial support is awarded from the profilingfund or holds or will
hold a Student Introduction Committee (an ‘INKOM’) board position.
The Board of Examiners may grant the request if refusal would result in an exceptional
case of extreme unfairness because of the fact that the student concerned could not
have taken the automatic graduation into account when he/she was planning his/her
study.
Article 6.2 Degree
Students who have passed the examination will be awarded the degree ‘Master of Science
in Artificial Intelligence’ or ‘Master of Science in Data Science for Decision Making’.
Article 6.3 Certificate and statements
1. As proof that the examination was passed, the Board of Examiners issues a
certificate, after it has been stated by or on behalf of UM’s Executive Board that the
procedural requirements for receiving the certificate have been met. The certificate is
based on the model that UM’s Executive Board has adopted. One certificate will be
issued per programme, even if the student completes several programmes.
2. The certificate that the examination has been passed also indicates:
a. the name of the institution;
b. the name of the programme;
c. the examination components;
d. (if applicable) the right to practice a specific profession which is related to the
certificate;
e. the degree awarded;
f. the date on which the programme was most recently accredited or was subjected
to the new programme test;.
3. Students who are entitled to the issuance of a certificate may, stating reasons, ask
the Board of Examiners not to do this yet (pursuant to Article 6.1(7)).
4. The certificate is signed by the chair of the Board of Examiners and the dean of the
faculty.
5. The certificate includes a list of the examination components.
6. The board of examiners includes a diploma supplement as referred to in Article
7.11(4) of the Act with the certificate. This diploma supplement is based on the
model adopted by UM’s Executive Board, which is in compliance with the agreed
European standard format.
7. The Board of Examiners may award the ‘cum laude’ or ‘summa cum laude’
designation in accordance with the provisions in the Rules and Regulations.
8. Students who have passed more than one exam and who cannot be issued a
certificate will upon request, receive a statement issued by the Board of Examiners
which at least indicates the exams which they passed.
Article 6.4 Grade point average (GPA)
The diploma supplement referred to in Article 6.3(7) indicates the final grade point
MSc EER Student Handbook 2020-2021
146
average (GPA) as specified in the Rules and Regulations, to provide a reflection of the
student’s academic performance.
Article 6.5 Right of appeal
Within six weeks after the decision by the examiner and the Board of Examiners is
announced, the student may appeal this decision to UM’s Complaint Service Point.
The appeal must be signed, must include a date and the name and address of the party
lodging the appeal, must indicate the grounds for the appeal and, if possible, must
include a copy of the decision being appealed.
Section 7 | Study Guidance
Article 7.1 Study progress administration
The faculty records the students’ individual study results and makes them available
through the Student Portal.
Article 7.2 Study guidance
1. The faculty will provide the introduction and study guidance for students registered
for the programme.
2. The study guidance includes
i. an introduction during the first week of the first semester of the first academic
year;
ii. group and individual advice on possible study paths in and outside the
programme, partly with a view to the professional options after the master’s
programme.
Section 8 | Transitional and Final Provisions
Article 8.1 Amendments
1. Amendments to these regulations may be adopted in a separate decision by the
faculty board, after a recommendation and consent from the programme
committee and after consent from or consultation with the faculty council.
2. An amendment in these regulations will not pertain to the current academic year,
unless the interests of the students will not reasonably be harmed as a result.
3. In addition, amendments may not affect, to the students’ detriment, a decision
regarding a student which has been taken by the board of examiners pursuant to
these regulations.
Article 8.2 Notice
1. The faculty board ensures that proper notice is given of these regulations, the rules
and regulations adopted by the Board of Examiners, and any changes to these
documents, by, for example, placing such notice on the faculty website/ and/or the
Student Portal.
2. Any interested party may obtain a copy of the documents referred to in the first
paragraph from the Student Affairs Office.
Article 8.2a Evaluation
 The Faculty Board will ensure that the education of the programme is regularly
evaluated, assessing at least – for the purpose of monitoring and if necessary
MSc EER Student Handbook 2020-2021
147
adapting the student workload – the amount of time students need to complete
their duties as set out therein.
Article 8.3 Unforeseen cases/safety net scheme
1. In cases not covered or not clearly covered by these regulations, decisions are taken
by or on behalf of the faculty board, after it has consulted with the board of
examiners.
2. In individual cases in which application of the Education and Examination
Regulations, would lead to manifestly unreasonable results, the board of examiners
can deviate from the stated regulations in the student’s favour.
Article 8.4 Effective date
This Regulation will come into force on 1 September 2020 and will apply for the
academic year 2020/2021.
Adopted by the faculty board on May 19, 2020.
MSc EER Student Handbook 2020-2021
148
MSc EER
Appendix 1a: Master programme Artificial Intelligence
Year 1 ECTS
Block 1 Foundations of Agents 6
Intelligent Search & Games 6
Block 2 Multi-Agent Systems 6
Advanced Concepts in Machine Learning 6
Block 3 Research project 6
Block 4 Autonomous Robotic Systems 6
1 elective course from the following set: 6
• Algorithms for Big Data
• Dynamic Game Theory
• Computational Statistics
• Advanced Natural Language Processing
Block 5 2 elective courses from the following set: 6 + 6
• Information Retrieval and Text Mining
• Deep Learning**
• Planning and Scheduling
• Computer Vision
Block 6 Research Project 6
Year 2 ECTS
Semester 1 Electives 30
• Internship
• Study Abroad
• Elective courses at other UM MSc programmes (at most 13 ECTS):
• Elective courses at DKE (for those started in September)*:
- Block 1: 2 elective courses from the following set
• Data Mining
• Signal and Image Processing
• Mathematical Optimization
• Stochastic Decision Making
- Block 2: 2 elective courses from the following set
• Model Identification and Data Fitting
• Applications of Image & Video Processing
• Information Security
- Block 3:
• Research Project
• Elective courses (for those started in February)*:
- Block 4: 2 elective courses from the following set
• Algorithms for Big Data
• Building & Mining Knowledge Graphs
• Dynamic Game Theory
• Computational Statistics
• Advanced Natural Language Processing
- Block 5: 2 elective courses from the following set
• Information Retrieval and Text Mining
• Symbolic Computation and Control
• Planning and Scheduling
• Computer Vision
Student Handbook 2020-2021
149
MSc EER
• Algorithms for Data Visualization
• Deep Learning**
- Block 6:
• Research Project
*Passed components can only count for one particular year
** To register for Deep Learning, the course Advanced Concepts in Machine Learning has
to be passed.
Semester 2 ECTS
Master’s Thesis 30
Appendix 1b: Master programme Data Science for Decision Making
Year 1 ECTS
Block 1 Data Mining 6
1 elective course from the following set 6
• Signal and Image Processing
• Mathematical Optimization
• Stochastic Decision Making
Block 2 Model Identification and Data Fitting 6
1 elective course from the following set 6
• Advanced Concepts in Machine Learning
• Applications of Image & Video Processing
• Information Security
Block 3 Research project 6
Block 4 Algorithms for Big Data 6
1 elective course from the following set 6
• Building & Mining Knowledge Graphs
• Dynamic Game Theory
• Computational Statistics
• Advanced Natural Language Processing
Block 5 Planning and Scheduling 6
1 elective course from the following set 6
• Symbolic Computation and Control
• Information Retrieval and Text Mining
• Computer Vision
• Algorithms for Data Visualization
• Deep Learning**
Block 6 Research project 6
Year 2 ECTS
Semester 1 Electives 30
• Internship
• Study Abroad
• Elective courses at other UM MSc programmes (at most 13 ECTS)
• Elective courses (for those started in September)*:
- Block 1: 2 elective courses from the following set
Student Handbook 2020-2021
150
MSc EER
• Signal and Image Processing
• Mathematical Optimization
• Stochastic Decision Making
• Foundation of Agents
• Intelligent Search and Games
- Block 2: 2 elective courses from the following set
• Multi Agent Systems
• Advanced Concepts in Machine Learning
• Applications of Image & Video Processing
• Information Security
- Block 3:
• Research Project
• Elective courses (for those started in February)*:
- Block 4: 2 elective courses from the following set
• Autonomous Robotic Systems
• Building & Mining Knowledge Graphs
• Dynamic Game Theory
• Computational Statistics
• Advanced Natural Language Processing
- Block 5: 2 elective courses from the following set
• Symbolic Computation and Control
• Information Retrieval and Text Mining
• Computer Vision
• Algorithms for Data Visualization
• Deep Learning**
- Block 6: Research Project
*Passed components only count for one particular year
** To register for Deep Learning, the course Advanced Concepts in Machine Learning has
to be passed.
Semester 2 ECTS
Master’s Thesis 30
Appendix 2: Blocks with limited capacity (see Article 4.5)
Block Faculty Number of participants Offered in semester
2.1-2.3 FSE/DKE t.b.a. - Study Abroad Semester 1 of year 2
Appendix 3: Cancelled
Appendix 4: Regulations for exchange programmes to study abroad
1. Components attained in connection with an exchange programme adopted by the
faculty board may be incorporated into the examination for the programme for
which the student is registered.
2. In principle, a student pursuing part of his/her studies in a foreign country does this
Student Handbook 2020-2021
151
MSc EER
as part of the DKE’s exchange programme at one of its exchange partners.
3. Studies in connection with the exchange programme constitute part of the studies
at UM.
4. The certificate may not be issued until the exchange programme has been
completed and the results in the foreign country have been incorporated. The
results will be taken into account for classification on the same basis as the results
attained in the faculty.
5. In connection with the requirements regarding the level and content of the
examination for the programme concerned, several conditions apply to incorporation. The Board of Examiners assesses whether a component may be incorporated
into the examination. Incorporation is only possible with the Board of Examiners’
permission. The following conditions must be satisfied:
a. the component is academic in nature;
b. in terms of content, the component does not overlap overlaps with other
examination components (Article 3.6 of the Education and Examination
Regulations for Bachelor’s Programmes);
c. the component was attained in connection with an exchange programme,
except for the situation described below;
d. the student requested written permission for incorporation beforehand, in
principle, by submitting a request with appendices to the Student Affairs Office,
which forwarded the information to the Board of Examiners;
e. the student will submit additional information to the Board of Examiners upon
request.
6. Point 2 may be deviated from if the student has good substantive reasons for
studying in a foreign country at a university, which is not an exchange partner.
Whether a foreign university is an exchange partner during the current year may
be ascertained in the student handbook. The following procedure applies in such a
situation:
 The student must timely submit (by letter or e-mail) a written request, stating
reasons, to the Study Advisor. In addition to the student’s personal and study
progress information, the request must include information about the university
where the student wishes to study, as well as about the student’s substantive
reasons for the request. These reasons must relate to the student’s own programme.
 The request is assessed by the Director of Studies. In this assessment, the level and
the available courses of the university concerned are compared to the exchange
partners’; the Director of Studies does not provide a judgment about the student’s
specific choice of subject is not be provided, but only about general questions
regarding the level and so forth.
 If the judgment about the university (regarding its level or otherwise) is favourable,
the Study Advisor will notify the student and the Board of Examiners. The student
will then follow the normal exchange programme procedure and will also follow
the normal approval procedure with the Board of Examiners for incorporation of
subjects.
 All cost involved for studying at a non- exchange partner is on behalf of the
student.
7. The following rules apply to incorporation by the Board of Examiners of results
attained in foreign countries:
a) results must be provided to the Board of Examiners through clear, original
written notices by the university concerned. In addition to personal information
about the student and information about the university, these notices should
Student Handbook 2020-2021
152
MSc EER
preferably include the following information: subject code and name; subject
level; subject study load; and exam date and result;
b) incorporation will only be possible if there has been a sufficient assessment. A
mere statement that the subject was ‘taken’ or words to that effect will not be
enough.
c) A result which constitutes a pass in the country concerned will also be considered
a pass here, and a fail in a foreign country will also be considered a fail here;
d) the study load conferred by the foreign university will be followed here without
adjustment. If, for example, 5 ECTS are conferred by the university concerned for
the subject, the subject will also count for 5 ECTS at the faculty, regardless of
how difficult or easy the subject was for the student.
e) if the study load in the foreign country is not expressed in ECTS units but in other
units, the Board of Examiners will convert the study load into ECTS units. The
conversion will be based on the study load for a full year of study or a full
programme in relation to a study load of 60 ECTS for a year at UM or 180 ECTS
for a three-year bachelor’s programme.
8. Study delay caused by the study abroad is the responsibility of the student.
9. Insofar as the Education and Examination Regulations and this appendix do not
address matters relating to incorporation of components attained elsewhere, the
Board of Examiners will decide on the matter.
Appendix 5: Accountability for the language of instruction
The choice for the language of instruction of the programme is in line with the UM
Code of Conduct on language in accordance with the Dutch Higher Education and
Research Act (WHW) art. 7.2.
Because of the specific educational nature and profile of the programme, teaching
and examinations are conducted in English. This guarantees the quality of education,
because:
• The content of the programme has an international orientation and focus.
Language of main course materials (handbooks, papers, tools) discussing or
supporting the latest advances in AI or Data Science are in English.
• The academic community is internationally oriented and the staff is international.
Project-Centred Learning implements the international classroom concept, which
requires a common international language. Students participate in international
collaboration by exchange programmes to study abroad, or conduct their internship
and thesis at companies/institutes where English is the lingua franca.
• The labour market demand is internationally oriented (English speaking). Alumni
typically end up in jobs at companies/institutes where English is the main language.
• The student intake and current population is internationally diverse and English is
the common language (26% Dutch; 74% non-Dutch in 2017-2018).
Student Handbook 2020-2021
153
5.2 Code of Conduct Department of Data Science and
Knowledge Engineering
1. General Principles
With this Code of Conduct the Department of Data Science and Knowledge
Engineering (DKE) aims to express its expectation of students’ behaviour in respect of
personal and academic matters. This code of conduct applies to all students, regular
and exchange students that take part in one of our programmes on the BA and MA
level. The Department recognizes and values the diversity of student experiences and
expectations, and is committed to treating students, both academically and
personally, in a fair and transparent manner. We expect our students to comply with
the requirements set down in this Code of Conduct. DKE expresses its commitment to:
• high academic standards, intellectual rigour and a high quality education;
• recognition of the importance of ideas and the pursuit of critical and open inquiry;
• tolerance, honesty and respect as the hallmarks of relationships throughout the
University community; and
• high standards of ethical behaviour. All students are required to be aware of and act
consistently with these values.
2. Personal conduct
All students are expected to:
• treat all employees, volunteers, peers or any other members of the public with
politeness, honesty and respect;
• maintain a cooperative and collaborative approach to inter-personal relationships;
• respect the privacy of employees and other students
• be alert to undesirable or unlawful behaviour
• have respect for one another at all times. Behaviour such as hostility, violence, sexual
harassment and discrimination on any grounds is not acceptable.
• be honest when taking part in academic (group) work. Taking exams, writing
assignments and writing a thesis occurs independently and with academic integrity,
refraining from fraud or improper citation
• show commitment by actively participating during lectures, classes and project work.
3. Communication
Communication among students or between students and staff members will be
conducted in a polite and respectful manner. The Department informs the students
via the official channels.
These sources need to be checked daily. It cannot be argued by a student that he or
she was unaware of information if it was disseminated via these official channels in a
correct and timely manner. Furthermore:
• E-mail is a formal means of communication, which requires politeness and mutual
respect.
• In case of a complaint and/or general or specific disappointment about an issue,
students must remain polite in expressing those emotions.
• Students should refrain from sending personal information of staff members and
peers to third parties.
• Problems among students or between students and staff members should be
resolved in a civil manner and the parties involved are recommended to inform the
student adviser.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
154
4. Academic conduct related to courses and exams
All students are expected to:
• be in time for classes and exams. Students who are late for the exam will not be
granted access.
• stay in the classroom/lecture hall during teaching. The obvious exception is a bathroom
break. However, students are expected to show respect to the lecturer and their peers
by not leaving and entering the room, which causes undesired disturbance.
• leave the classrooms and common rooms behind in an appropriate manner. Eating
should occur outside the classroom. Eating and drinking is permitted in the commons
rooms, as long as these rooms are maintained. This includes making sure that no waste
is left behind.
• Refrain from disrespectful behaviour during class/lectures. This includes gaming and all
other activities that are not part of the course programme.
• enrol timely and within the set deadlines for courses and exams (including resits). It is a
student’s responsibility to maintain current information in the student information
system, and observe key dates and deadlines;
• read all official correspondence from the University, including email about the courses
and exams
• act ethically and honestly in the preparation, conduct, submission and publication of
academic work, and during all forms of assessment, including formal examinations and
(in)formal tests
• behave professionally, ethically and respectfully in all dealings with partner Universities
during the free semester and during Internships.
• During a semester abroad or an internship, DKE student represent the Department at
their host organization and needs to be aware of both the rules and regulations at DKE
about a semester abroad or an internship as well as the rules and regulations at the
host institute. Students must always make sure to communicate politely and swiftly
about any possible question or problem.
Student Handbook 2020-2021
155
Student Handbook 2020-2021
156
Dr. Pietro Bonizzi
Dr. ir. Kurt Driessens
Dr. Steven Kelk
Dr. Jan Niehues
Dr. Pieter Collins
Dr. Matúš Mihalák Dr. Rico Möckel
Staff
Dr. Stelios Asteriadis Dr. Alexia Brassouli Dr. Cameron Browne
Dr. Rachel Cavill Dr. Joël Karel
Dr. Siamak
Mehrkanoon
Prof. dr. Ralf Peeters Tom Pepels Dr. Dimitris Rafailidis
Student Handbook 2020-2021
157
Prof. dr. Frank
Thuijsman
Prof. dr. Gerhard Weiss
Dr. Christof Seiler Dr. Jerry Spanakis
Prof. Dr. Mark
Winands
Dr. Evgueni Smirnov Dr. Katerina Stankova
Dr. Georgios Dr. Jos Uiterwijk
Stamoulis
Dr. Steven Chaplick Dr. Marieke
Musegaas
Dr. Gijs
Schoenmakers
Dr. ir. Nico Roos Prof. dr. ir.
Jan Scholtes
Dr. Katharina Schüller
Staff - continued
Student Handbook 2020-2021
Dr. Enrique Hortal Dr. Chiara Sironi
Prof. Dr. Anna
Wilbik
Prof. Dr. Nava
Tintarev
Dr. Otti D'Huys
Education periods
Period 1: 31 August - 16 October 2020
Period 2: 26 October - 11 December 2020
Period 3: 4 January - 22 January 2021
Period 4: 1 February - 26 March 2021
Period 5: 5 April - 28 May 2021
Period 6: 7 June - 25 June 2021
Inkom Maastricht University
August 2020
Introduction day
24, 25 August 2020 (Bachelor) and
27 August 2020 (Masters)
Exam and Resit periods
Period 1 - Exams: 19 - 23 October 2020
Period 2 - Exams: 14 - 18 December 2020
Period 3 - Resits semester 1: 25 - 29 January 2021
Period 4 - Exams: 29 March - 2 April 2021
Period 5 - Exams: 31 May - 4 June 2021
Period 6 - Resits semester 2: 28 June - 2 July 2021
Academic year 2020-2021
Project weeks
Period 3: Project weeks 4 - 22 January 2021
BA year 1, Final presentation: January 2021
BA year 2, Final presentation: January 2021
BA year 3, Final presentation: January 2021
MA year 1, Project seminar: January 2021
Period 6: Project weeks 7 - 25 June 2021
BA year 1, Final presentation: June 2021
BA year 2, Final presentation: June 2021
MA year 1, Project seminar: June 2021
Bachelor Winter Conference: December 2020
Bachelor Summer Conference: June 2021
Bachelor’s Programme Data Science and Artificial Intelligence (year 1, 2, 3) and
Master’s Programmes Artificial Intelligence and Data Science for Decision Making- (year 1, 2)
DKE students will have to register for their own courses, exams and resits through the
Student Portal.
Note: exams can also be scheduled in the evening, from 06.00 p.m. until 09.00 p.m.
(Public) Holiday, no courses
Christmas: 21 December 2020 - 1 January 2021
New Year’s Day: 1 January 2021
Carnival break: 15 - 19 February 2021
Good Friday: 2 April 2021
Easter Monday: 5 April 2021
Bridging day & Dutch King’s Day: 26 & 27 April 2021
Liberation Day: 5 May 2021
Ascension Day & Bridging Day: 13 & 14 May 2021
Whit Monday: 24 May 2021
158Student Handbook 2020-2021
Graduation
t.b.d. July 2021 (Masters)
t.b.d. July 2021 (Bachelor)
159Student Handbook 2020-2021
Student handbook 2020-2021
Published, edited and coordinated by:
Academic Guide
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Department of Data Science and Knowledge

In mathematics, graph theory is the study of graphs, which are mathematical structures used to model pairwise relations between objects. A graph in this context is made up of vertices (also called nodes or points) which are connected by edges (also called links or lines). A distinction is made between undirected graphs, where edges link two vertices symmetrically, and directed graphs, where edges link two vertices asymmetrically; see Graph (discrete mathematics) for more detailed definitions and for other variations in the types of graph that are commonly considered. Graphs are one of the prime objects of study in discrete mathematics.
In computer science, graphs are used to represent networks of communication, data organization, computational devices, the flow of computation, etc. For instance, the link structure of a website can be represented by a directed graph, in which the vertices represent web pages and directed edges represent links from one page to another. A similar approach can be taken to problems in social media,[9] travel, biology, computer chip design, mapping the progression of neuro-degenerative diseases,[10][11] and many other fields. The development of algorithms to handle graphs is therefore of major interest in computer science. The transformation of graphs is often formalized and represented by graph rewrite systems. Complementary to graph transformation systems focusing on rule-based in-memory manipulation of graphs are graph databases geared towards transaction-safe, persistent storing and querying of graph-structured data.
Graph-theoretic methods, in various forms, have proven particularly useful in linguistics, since natural language often lends itself well to discrete structure. Traditionally, syntax and compositional semantics follow tree-based structures, whose expressive power lies in the principle of compositionality, modeled in a hierarchical graph. More contemporary approaches such as head-driven phrase structure grammar model the syntax of natural language using typed feature structures, which are directed acyclic graphs. Within lexical semantics, especially as applied to computers, modeling word meaning is easier when a given word is understood in terms of related words; semantic networks are therefore important in computational linguistics. Still, other methods in phonology (e.g. optimality theory, which uses lattice graphs) and morphology (e.g. finite-state morphology, using finite-state transducers) are common in the analysis of language as a graph. Indeed, the usefulness of this area of mathematics to linguistics has borne organizations such as TextGraphs, as well as various 'Net' projects, such as WordNet, VerbNet, and others.
Computer science is the study of algorithmic processes, computational machines and computation itself.[1] As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms, computation and information to the practical issues of implementing computational systems in hardware and software.[2][3]

Its fields can be divided into theoretical and practical disciplines. For example, the theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them, while computer graphics or computational geometry emphasize more specific applications. Algorithms and data structures have been called the heart of computer science.[4] Programming language theory considers approaches to the description of computational processes, while computer programming involves the use of them to create complex systems. Computer architecture describes construction of computer components and computer-operated equipment. Artificial intelligence aims to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. A digital computer is capable of simulating various information processes.[5] The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[6] Computer scientists usually focus on academic research. The Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer sciences.
Theoretical computer science (TCS) is a subset of general computer science and mathematics that focuses on mathematical aspects of computer science such as the theory of computation, lambda calculus, and type theory.

It is difficult to circumscribe the theoretical areas precisely. The ACM's Special Interest Group on Algorithms and Computation Theory (SIGACT) provides the following description:[1]

TCS covers a wide variety of topics including algorithms, data structures, computational complexity, parallel and distributed computation, probabilistic computation, quantum computation, automata theory, information theory, cryptography, program semantics and verification, machine learning, computational biology, computational economics, computational geometry, and computational number theory and algebra. Work in this field is often distinguished by its emphasis on mathematical technique and rigor.
Automata theory is the study of abstract machines and automata, as well as the computational problems that can be solved using them. It is a theory in theoretical computer science. The word automata (the plural of automaton) comes from the Greek word αὐτόματα, which means "self-making". An automaton (Automata in plural) is an abstract self-propelled computing device which follows a predetermined sequence of operations automatically. An automaton with a finite number of states is called a Finite Automaton (FA) or Finite State Machine (FSM).

The figure at right illustrates a finite-state machine, which belongs to a well-known type of automaton. This automaton consists of states (represented in the figure by circles) and transitions (represented by arrows). As the automaton sees a symbol of input, it makes a transition (or jump) to another state, according to its transition function, which takes the current state and the recent symbol as its inputs.

Automata theory is closely related to formal language theory. An automaton is a finite representation of a formal language that may be an infinite set. Automata are often classified by the class of formal languages they can recognize, typically illustrated by the Chomsky hierarchy, which describes the relations between various languages and kinds of formalized logics.

Automata play a major role in theory of computation, compiler construction, artificial intelligence, parsing and formal verification.
Data science is an inter-disciplinary field that uses scientific methods, processes, algorithms and systems to extract knowledge and insights from many structural and unstructured data.[1][2] Data science is related to data mining, machine learning and big data.

Data science is a "concept to unify statistics, data analysis and their related methods" in order to "understand and analyze actual phenomena" with data.[3] It uses techniques and theories drawn from many fields within the context of mathematics, statistics, computer science, domain knowledge and information science. Turing award winner Jim Gray imagined data science as a "fourth paradigm" of science (empirical, theoretical, computational and now data-driven) and asserted that "everything about science is changing because of the impact of information technology" and the data deluge.
Machine learning (ML) is the study of computer algorithms that improve automatically through experience.[1] It is seen as a part of artificial intelligence. Machine learning algorithms build a model based on sample data, known as "training data", in order to make predictions or decisions without being explicitly programmed to do so.[2] Machine learning algorithms are used in a wide variety of applications, such as email filtering and computer vision, where it is difficult or unfeasible to develop conventional algorithms to perform the needed tasks.

A subset of machine learning is closely related to computational statistics, which focuses on making predictions using computers; but not all machine learning is statistical learning. The study of mathematical optimization delivers methods, theory and application domains to the field of machine learning. Data mining is a related field of study, focusing on exploratory data analysis through unsupervised learning.[4][5] In its application across business problems, machine learning is also referred to as predictive analytics.
Machine learning involves computers discovering how they can perform tasks without being explicitly programmed to do so. It involves computers learning from data provided so that they carry out certain tasks. For simple tasks assigned to computers, it is possible to program algorithms telling the machine how to execute all steps required to solve the problem at hand; on the computer's part, no learning is needed. For more advanced tasks, it can be challenging for a human to manually create the needed algorithms. In practice, it can turn out to be more effective to help the machine develop its own algorithm, rather than having human programmers specify every needed step.[6]

The discipline of machine learning employs various approaches to teach computers to accomplish tasks where no fully satisfactory algorithm is available. In cases where vast numbers of potential answers exist, one approach is to label some of the correct answers as valid. This can then be used as training data for the computer to improve the algorithm(s) it uses to determine correct answers. For example, to train a system for the task of digital character recognition, the MNIST dataset of handwritten digits has often been used.[6]
As a scientific endeavor, machine learning grew out of the quest for artificial intelligence. In the early days of AI as an academic discipline, some researchers were interested in having machines learn from data. They attempted to approach the problem with various symbolic methods, as well as what was then termed "neural networks"; these were mostly perceptrons and other models that were later found to be reinventions of the generalized linear models of statistics.[18] Probabilistic reasoning was also employed, especially in automated medical diagnosis.[19]:488

However, an increasing emphasis on the logical, knowledge-based approach caused a rift between AI and machine learning. Probabilistic systems were plagued by theoretical and practical problems of data acquisition and representation.[19]:488 By 1980, expert systems had come to dominate AI, and statistics was out of favor.[20] Work on symbolic/knowledge-based learning did continue within AI, leading to inductive logic programming, but the more statistical line of research was now outside the field of AI proper, in pattern recognition and information retrieval.[19]:708–710; 755 Neural networks research had been abandoned by AI and computer science around the same time. This line, too, was continued outside the AI/CS field, as "connectionism", by researchers from other disciplines including Hopfield, Rumelhart and Hinton. Their main success came in the mid-1980s with the reinvention of backpropagation.[19]:25

Machine learning (ML), reorganized as a separate field, started to flourish in the 1990s. The field changed its goal from achieving artificial intelligence to tackling solvable problems of a practical nature. It shifted focus away from the symbolic approaches it had inherited from AI, and toward methods and models borrowed from statistics and probability theory.[20]

As of 2020, many sources continue to assert that machine learning remains a subfield of AI.[21][22][16] The main disagreement is whether all of ML is part of AI, as this would mean that anyone using ML could claim they are using AI. Others have the view that not all of ML is part of AI[23][24][25] where only an 'intelligent' subset of ML is part of AI.[26]

The question to what is the difference between ML and AI is answered by Judea Pearl in The Book of Why.[27] Accordingly ML learns and predicts based on passive observations, whereas AI implies an agent interacting with the environment to learn and take actions that maximize its chance of successfully achieving its goals.[30]
Machine learning and data mining often employ the same methods and overlap significantly, but while machine learning focuses on prediction, based on known properties learned from the training data, data mining focuses on the discovery of (previously) unknown properties in the data (this is the analysis step of knowledge discovery in databases). Data mining uses many machine learning methods, but with different goals; on the other hand, machine learning also employs data mining methods as "unsupervised learning" or as a preprocessing step to improve learner accuracy. Much of the confusion between these two research communities (which do often have separate conferences and separate journals, ECML PKDD being a major exception) comes from the basic assumptions they work with: in machine learning, performance is usually evaluated with respect to the ability to reproduce known knowledge, while in knowledge discovery and data mining (KDD) the key task is the discovery of previously unknown knowledge. Evaluated with respect to known knowledge, an uninformed (unsupervised) method will easily be outperformed by other supervised methods, while in a typical KDD task, supervised methods cannot be used due to the unavailability of training data.
Statistics is the discipline that concerns the collection, organization, analysis, interpretation, and presentation of data.[1][2][3] In applying statistics to a scientific, industrial, or social problem, it is conventional to begin with a statistical population or a statistical model to be studied. Populations can be diverse groups of people or objects such as "all people living in a country" or "every atom composing a crystal". Statistics deals with every aspect of data, including the planning of data collection in terms of the design of surveys and experiments.[4]

When census data cannot be collected, statisticians collect data by developing specific experiment designs and survey samples. Representative sampling assures that inferences and conclusions can reasonably extend from the sample to the population as a whole. An experimental study involves taking measurements of the system under study, manipulating the system, and then taking additional measurements using the same procedure to determine if the manipulation has modified the values of the measurements. In contrast, an observational study does not involve experimental manipulation.

Two main statistical methods are used in data analysis: descriptive statistics, which summarize data from a sample using indexes such as the mean or standard deviation, and inferential statistics, which draw conclusions from data that are subject to random variation (e.g., observational errors, sampling variation).[5] Descriptive statistics are most often concerned with two sets of properties of a distribution (sample or population): central tendency (or location) seeks to characterize the distribution's central or typical value, while dispersion (or variability) characterizes the extent to which members of the distribution depart from its center and each other. Inferences on mathematical statistics are made under the framework of probability theory, which deals with the analysis of random phenomena.

A standard statistical procedure involves the collection of data leading to test of the relationship between two statistical data sets, or a data set and synthetic data drawn from an idealized model. A hypothesis is proposed for the statistical relationship between the two data sets, and this is compared as an alternative to an idealized null hypothesis of no relationship between two data sets. Rejecting or disproving the null hypothesis is done using statistical tests that quantify the sense in which the null can be proven false, given the data that are used in the test. Working from a null hypothesis, two basic forms of error are recognized: Type I errors (null hypothesis is falsely rejected giving a "false positive") and Type II errors (null hypothesis fails to be rejected and an actual relationship between populations is missed giving a "false negative").[6] Multiple problems have come to be associated with this framework, ranging from obtaining a sufficient sample size to specifying an adequate null hypothesis.[citation needed]

Measurement processes that generate statistical data are also subject to error. Many of these errors are classified as random (noise) or systematic (bias), but other types of errors (e.g., blunder, such as when an analyst reports incorrect units) can also occur. The presence of missing data or censoring may result in biased estimates and specific techniques have been developed to address these problems.
A probability distribution is a function that assigns a probability to each measurable subset of the possible outcomes of a random experiment, survey, or procedure of statistical inference. Examples are found in experiments whose sample space is non-numerical, where the distribution would be a categorical distribution; experiments whose sample space is encoded by discrete random variables, where the distribution can be specified by a probability mass function; and experiments with sample spaces encoded by continuous random variables, where the distribution can be specified by a probability density function. More complex experiments, such as those involving stochastic processes defined in continuous time, may demand the use of more general probability measures.

A probability distribution can either be univariate or multivariate. A univariate distribution gives the probabilities of a single random variable taking on various alternative values; a multivariate distribution (a joint probability distribution) gives the probabilities of a random vector—a set of two or more random variables—taking on various combinations of values. Important and commonly encountered univariate probability distributions include the binomial distribution, the hypergeometric distribution, and the normal distribution. The multivariate normal distribution is a commonly encountered multivariate distribution.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is intelligence demonstrated by machines, unlike the natural intelligence displayed by humans and animals, which involves consciousness and emotionality. The distinction between the former and the latter categories is often revealed by the acronym chosen. 'Strong' AI is usually labelled as AGI (Artificial General Intelligence) while attempts to emulate 'natural' intelligence have been called ABI (Artificial Biological Intelligence). Leading AI textbooks define the field as the study of "intelligent agents": any device that perceives its environment and takes actions that maximize its chance of successfully achieving its goals.[3] Colloquially, the term "artificial intelligence" is often used to describe machines (or computers) that mimic "cognitive" functions that humans associate with the human mind, such as "learning" and "problem solving".[4]

As machines become increasingly capable, tasks considered to require "intelligence" are often removed from the definition of AI, a phenomenon known as the AI effect.[5] A quip in Tesler's Theorem says "AI is whatever hasn't been done yet."[6] For instance, optical character recognition is frequently excluded from things considered to be AI,[7] having become a routine technology.[8] Modern machine capabilities generally classified as AI include successfully understanding human speech,[9] competing at the highest level in strategic game systems (such as chess and Go),[10] autonomously operating cars, intelligent routing in content delivery networks, and military simulations.[11]

Artificial intelligence was founded as an academic discipline in 1955, and in the years since has experienced several waves of optimism,[12][13] followed by disappointment and the loss of funding (known as an "AI winter"),[14][15] followed by new approaches, success and renewed funding.[13][16] After AlphaGo successfully defeated a professional Go player in 2015, artificial intelligence once again attracted widespread global attention.[17] For most of its history, AI research has been divided into sub-fields that often fail to communicate with each other.[18] These sub-fields are based on technical considerations, such as particular goals (e.g. "robotics" or "machine learning"),[19] the use of particular tools ("logic" or artificial neural networks), or deep philosophical differences.[22][23][24] Sub-fields have also been based on social factors (particular institutions or the work of particular researchers).[18]

The traditional problems (or goals) of AI research include reasoning, knowledge representation, planning, learning, natural language processing, perception and the ability to move and manipulate objects.[19] General intelligence is among the field's long-term goals.[25] Approaches include statistical methods, computational intelligence, and traditional symbolic AI. Many tools are used in AI, including versions of search and mathematical optimization, artificial neural networks, and methods based on statistics, probability and economics. The AI field draws upon computer science, information engineering, mathematics, psychology, linguistics, philosophy, and many other fields.

The field was founded on the assumption that human intelligence "can be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it".[26] This raises philosophical arguments about the mind and the ethics of creating artificial beings endowed with human-like intelligence. These issues have been explored by myth, fiction and philosophy since antiquity.[31] Some people also consider AI to be a danger to humanity if it progresses unabated.[32][33] Others believe that AI, unlike previous technological revolutions, will create a risk of mass unemployment.[34]

In the twenty-first century, AI techniques have experienced a resurgence following concurrent advances in computer power, large amounts of data, and theoretical understanding; and AI techniques have become an essential part of the technology industry, helping to solve many challenging problems in computer science, software engineering and operations research.
Discrete mathematics is the study of mathematical structures that are countable or otherwise distinct and separable. Examples of structures that are discrete are combinations, graphs, and logical statements. Discrete structures can be finite or infinite. Discrete mathematics is in contrast to continuous mathematics, which deals with structures which can range in value over the real numbers, or have some non-separable quality.

Since the time of Isaac Newton and until quite recently, almost the entire emphasis of applied mathematics has been on continuously varying processes, modeled by the mathematical continuum and using methods derived from the diﬀerential and integral calculus. In contrast, discrete mathematics concerns itself mainly with finite collections of discrete objects. With the growth of digital devices, especially computers, discrete mathematics has become more and more important.

Discrete structures can be counted, arranged, placed into sets, and put into ratios with one another. Although discrete mathematics is a wide and varied field, there are certain rules that carry over into many topics. The concept of independent events and the rules of product, sum, and PIE are shared among combinatorics, set theory, and probability. In addition, De Morgan's laws are applicable in many fields of discrete mathematics.

Often, what makes discrete mathematics problems interesting and challenging are the restrictions that are placed on them. Although the field of discrete mathematics has many elegant formulas to apply, it is rare that a practical problem will fit perfectly to a specific formula. Part of the joy of discovering discrete mathematics is to learn many different approaches to problem-solving, and then be able to creatively apply disparate strategies towards a solution.
Numerical analysis is the study of algorithms that use numerical approximation (as opposed to symbolic manipulations) for the problems of mathematical analysis (as distinguished from discrete mathematics). Numerical analysis naturally finds application in all fields of engineering and the physical sciences, but in the 21st century also the life sciences, social sciences, medicine, business and even the arts have adopted elements of scientific computations. The growth in computing power has revolutionized the use of realistic mathematical models in science and engineering, and subtle numerical analysis is required to implement these detailed models of the world. For example, ordinary differential equations appear in celestial mechanics (predicting the motions of planets, stars and galaxies); numerical linear algebra is important for data analysis;[2][3][4] stochastic differential equations and Markov chains are essential in simulating living cells for medicine and biology.

Before the advent of modern computers, numerical methods often depended on hand interpolation formulas applied to data from large printed tables. Since the mid 20th century, computers calculate the required functions instead, but many of the same formulas nevertheless continue to be used as part of the software algorithms.[5]

The numerical point of view goes back to the earliest mathematical writings. A tablet from the Yale Babylonian Collection (YBC 7289), gives a sexagesimal numerical approximation of the square root of 2, the length of the diagonal in a unit square.

Numerical analysis continues this long tradition: rather than exact symbolic answers, which can only be applied to real-world measurements by translation into digits, it gives approximate solutions within specified error bounds.
The overall goal of the field of numerical analysis is the design and analysis of techniques to give approximate but accurate solutions to hard problems, the variety of which is suggested by the following:

Advanced numerical methods are essential in making numerical weather prediction feasible.
Computing the trajectory of a spacecraft requires the accurate numerical solution of a system of ordinary differential equations.
Car companies can improve the crash safety of their vehicles by using computer simulations of car crashes. Such simulations essentially consist of solving partial differential equations numerically.
Hedge funds (private investment funds) use tools from all fields of numerical analysis to attempt to calculate the value of stocks and derivatives more precisely than other market participants.
Airlines use sophisticated optimization algorithms to decide ticket prices, airplane and crew assignments and fuel needs. Historically, such algorithms were developed within the overlapping field of operations research.
Insurance companies use numerical programs for actuarial analysis.
The rest of this section outlines several important themes of numerical analysis.

The resit is designed to be equivalent to the 3 assignments, but at the same time be doable within the given time. Otherwise it would not be fair to have a resit that is equal to 1 project count as much as 3 projects.

And of course it is not fair for the resit to be too hard, so passing should be possible if someone has followed some of the course material during the teaching period.

The resit is 5 pages long because each question has all the information you need. If I gave you short questions, you would have to try to guess what you need to do, and would likely get lost quite quickly.

Instead:

each resit question has step-by-step instructions for you to follow
this is to guide you, so you do not have to search how to solve a problem from scratch
the 4 first questions are based on material we covered in the lectures, so you need to check:
lecture notes, the corresponding chapters in the book (which I have provided you with) and the labs: these will all help you solve the project questions (similarly to the 3 projects)
the titles of the questions are often an indication of where to search (similarly to the 3 projects)
the last question is based on material we covered, but is also self-contained:
this means that I provide you with step-by-step instructions and the equations you need to apply (you do not need to study new material!)
so you need to follow these instructions carefully,  produce the requested results, think about how your results are related to the questions and write your answers down
you are allowed to look up concepts you do not understand, but the lecture notes/labs for many of the questions already contain helpful information (this will save you precious googling time, I spent a lot of time finding relevant links etc)


And of course, you can always email me questions if you still have some!

Due to indications of increased hacking attempts, we are forced to take security measures regarding UM student accounts. The best way to avoid security problems is to perform our regular annual password reset now. We ask you to create a new password as soon as possible. From Monday 14 June onwards, when you log in for the first time, you will be notified that you need to change your password to gain access to our systems. To prevent this from happening at an inconvenient time, we advise you to take action before that day. You can even do it right now.

Students who have changed their password after 31 May 2021 do not have to do anything. They will not receive a notification to change their password either.

How do I change my UM password?
We advise you to always change your password via MyAccount. You can find more information on the UM website by searching for 'MyAccount'. For further support please contact the ICTS Servicedesk.

TIP: After changing your password via MyAccount, do not forget to change the password on your mobile devices as well. This concerns e.g. WiFi (Eduroam) and your email clients. In most cases you will be asked for the new password immediately, but if necessary you can also change them manually. You can find manuals for this on the UM website using the search term "manuals".

Final remarks
Your password is and remains personal and may not be shared with others. UM will never ask you for your password by email, phone or in any other way.

We also recommend that you do not use your UM password for your other accounts, such as Zoom, web shops or private email providers. Please choose a completely unrelated password for these accounts.

On 9 June 2021, you have received an email invite to complete the online evaluations of the period 5 courses. Please take the time to let your lecturers know your feedback and suggestions (if you haven't done so already!). Your suggestions and the results from these surveys will improve the courses for future generations of students. To fill in the period 5 course evaluation surveys, please go to: https://iwio.dke.maastrichtuniversity.nl/selectcourses.asp

We look forward to hearing about your thoughts on the courses and your learning experience!

With kindest regards,

The COVID-19 measures have been further eased. What does this mean for us? We can use the UM food services again and gather with four people in and around our buildings. The number of spectators allowed at academic sessions has been increased. Teams of employees are allowed to follow group trainings, study and student associations can expand their activities and more is possible at UM SPORT.

UM food service areas open
From 7 June, you can use the seating areas at the food service locations in the UM buildings. This can only be done within the rules that apply to the hospitality industry. That means a maximum of four people at a table and a maximum of 50 people in a room, excluding the food service staff. At the tables, the chairs must be 1.5 meters away from each other. You are not allowed to move tables and chairs. If all the seats are occupied, this means the maximum number of visitors allowed has been reached. If you can’t find a seat, you have to leave the area.

Four people in and around UM buildings
In and around the UM buildings you can gather in a group of up to four persons as long as you are at least 1.5 meters away from each other.

Up to 30 spectators at PhD defences and inaugural events
As of 7 June, a maximum of 30 spectators may be present in the UM auditorium at an on-site PhD defence or inaugural ceremony. The number of spectators is set at 30 people due to the size of the auditorium and to avoid crowding in the building. Not included in the 30 people are the PhD candidate, their paranymphs, the beadle, prorector, supervisor(s)/co-supervisor(s), secretary and opponents.

Graduation ceremonies
Graduation ceremonies are permitted on campus again as long as the relevant measures are adhered to. That means no more than 50 people with assigned seats at least 1.5 meters away from each other are allowed.

Employee gatherings for training and development
Working from home remains the norm for the time being if you don't have a specific reason to come to work. However, from now on employee teams (maximum 50 people) can meet on campus for training and development activities.

Study and student association activities
Study and student associations may organise activities with no more than 50 people and only with assigned seats at least 1.5 meters away from each other. The associations’ food/drink locations may be opened within the rules that apply to the hospitality industry. After receiving permission from their respective faculties, study associations can offer in-person activities as an alternative form of on-campus education (only one day a week per student). These activities also have a maximum of 50 people, and a minimum distance of 1.5 meters from each other must be maintained.

UM SPORT
It is again possible to participate in live group lessons and game sports at the University Sports Centre (USC). These include activities such as yoga, Zumba, spinning, HIIT, badminton, basketball, volleyball and indoor football. The student sports associations of these sports – including the UM Cheerleaders – are also allowed to practice in the USC and the special senior lessons have started again as well. In addition to the indoor sports options, a number of sports activities will remain online or outside for the time being. Lockers, showers and changing rooms are still closed.

UM SPORT memberships have been adapted to the current availability and can still be purchased for this academic year. For more information, please contact umsports@maastrichtuniversity.nl

UM SPORT members have received detailed information via the UM SPORT newsletter.

On June 1st, Maastricht University announced a planned return to campus after summer. Great news!

So what does this mean for you as a DKE student? First of all, we recommend you take a close look at the UM announcement. It applies to us as well, so here are the main changes as of Monday 30 August 2021:

·        We expect all students at our PHS1 building for education, though hybrid education (meaning part offline, part online) may still be in effect due to limitations on group size.
·        Of course, we will comply with then-current safety regulations on campus. The Dutch government expects that students will no longer need to maintain 1.5m distance from each other, but you may for instance still need to wear a face mask.
·        Can’t come to Maastricht due to travel restrictions? In cases like that, we will facilitate an online alternative for the start of the academic year. However, we expect you to be physically present if, when and once you can. That may mean we will reinstate our attendance requirements.

Long story short: if you aren’t in Maastricht yet, start planning to make sure you’ll be around when the new academic year kicks off!

We’ll be back with more information in July, so make sure to keep a close eye on your inbox as September approaches.

Looking forward to seeing you soon,

After the summer we can come back to campus. Finally, we get to see each other in real life. Things won’t be completely back to the way they were when we first get started. Corona will not have completely disappeared by then. But the doors can be opened, allowing us to study and work again on campus. In this email, we explain how we are going to do that, and in the cases where we don’t have answers yet, we let you know what the current situation is and how we’ll progress.

Students

Education
The government has recommended organising education without metre-and-a-half social distancing as of August. Therefore, we are pleased to announce that at the start of the new academic year we expect all students on location for their education-related activities, such as tutorial groups, labs, exams and advisory sessions. You will hear from your faculty what that will look like for your programme as soon as possible.

Mandatory attendance
This means that, where applicable, there will be mandatory attendance.

What measures will still apply after the summer?
As of August, the maximum group size allowed indoors may still be limited, so you might need to follow certain parts of your programme online. Furthermore, we will provide extra hand-cleaning and disinfection stations in the buildings. Measures such as wearing face masks, walking routes, self-testing and staying at home if you have corona-related symptoms will continue as long as the National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM) requires.

Travel restrictions
It may be the case that you cannot come to Maastricht for corona-related reasons. For example, because you cannot travel to the Netherlands from the country where you are staying. In that case, when possible, you can follow your programme online. When this is not possible, such as with lab work, you will have to make these activities up later. As soon as the travel restrictions are lifted, we expect you back on campus. If you already have questions about this or other personal circumstances, please contact your study advisor.

Employees

All our employees are also welcome back at their usual work location starting in the new academic year. Working from home as required by the corona measures will come to an end. If you still have corona-related reasons not to come to campus after the summer, you can contact your supervisor or the occupational health physician to come to a solution together.

In the coming months, plans for hybrid forms of work (partly at home, partly on campus) will also be presented. As soon as there's more clarity, we'll let you know.

INKOM and faculty introductions

The INKOM and the faculty introductions are activities with many participants. Of course, we want to organise these as safely as possible. For the faculty introductions, this may mean that certain parts, in which large numbers of participants are involved, will still take place online. For the INKOM, all activities will be arranged in such a way that they can take place safely and responsibly within the rules and on location. We'll keep you posted.

PhD defences and other events

PhD defences are currently allowed on campus with a maximum of 15 spectators. Also in the new academic year, PhD defences will be allowed on campus in adherence to the government measures that apply then. For other events, such as inaugural and farewell addresses and research symposiums, the guidelines of the RIVM will always be considered when determining what is possible. We'll keep you informed via the communication mails.

Finally...

... we would like to stress that we are doing everything we can to welcome you safely back on campus in the new academic year. We will keep a close eye on all developments in the coming months and adjust our plans as necessary.

Remember: the measures we are all used to by now still apply. So, keep a metre-and-a-half distance from one another, wash your hands frequently, wear a face mask, do the self-tests and stay at home if you have any symptoms or if you have had contact with someone who has corona. Even if you have been vaccinated!

Already over a year we have all been facing a lot of challenges, the Student Affairs Office team hopes you are all doing well.

It is that time of the year again to inform you that as of Tuesday 1 June 2021 you can start booking your courses and projects for the academic year 2021-2022.
It is advisable to book for the whole year at once. Be aware that some courses and projects have prerequisites.
The deadline for booking courses in period 1 and semester project 1 is 25 July 2021.

If you intend to continue with your current study programme(s) in the academic year 2021-2022, you will need to re-register via Studielink before you can register for courses.
Make sure your online student registration for 2021-2022 is fully approved, only then you will be able to register for courses.

Step 1: Re-register for your programme via Studielink.
To do so, use the ‘Extend your enrolment’ link in Studielink. You will see this link below the ‘My To Do List’.
Please, do NOT use the ‘New registration request’ link on Studielink. This link is only for first-year registration requests and/or registration for a different programme.
If you have questions about re-registration or tuition fee rates, please check the website. You can also send an email to study@maastrichtuniversity.nl or contact the Call Centre of the Student Services Centre: +31 43 38 85 388.
 Step 2: Register for courses 2021-2022.
If you wish to participate in education you can start booking courses via the Student Portal > My courses
Don’t know what course to choose? Check out our course catalogue first via the UM website: https://www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/education
-> choose Bachelor’s or Master’s -> choose your programme -> click “See the whole programme” and click “Courses and Curriculum” in the menu on the left.

Note 1: The course on Robotics and Embedded Systems (period 1, KEN3236) will only be given onsite (though the lectures will be online available). Students will work with robotic setups during the labs, so you need to be able to come to DKE.
Because of Covid-19 restrictions, we can only allow 40 students to enter the course, so make sure you register your preferred courses in time. New third year DKE students who take the course the first time will have priority.

Note 2: Resits will take place at the end of semester 1 (24.01.2022 – 28.01.2022), for bachelor year 3, period 4 courses (30.05.2022 – 03.06.2022) and at the end of semester 2 all other courses (27.06.2022 – 01.07.2022).

It is not possible to register only for a single exam (“Exam-only”). If you want to take an exam, you need to register for the course and then you will be automatically registered for the regular (1st attempt) exam.
Course registration will allow you to attend the lectures and it will give you access to the online course materials.
If you wish to be eligible to apply for a resit, you will need to have been booked for the full course prior to the concerned resit.




Step 3: Check your course registrations
Your course registrations will be visible in the Student Portal.
Your first deadline is 25 July 2021, make sure you do not miss it and book ahead for the rest of the year. Without a correct registration you cannot participate in the lectures and you will not have access to online study materials.


Enclosed document (see attach) explains the booking instructions and deadlines for registration and deregistration of courses, projects and resits for 2021-2022.
We recommend reading this procedure very carefully to avoid surprises or disappointments during the academic year.
We advise you to save this document. These procedures and deadlines are also published on Intranet via the Student Portal> My Links



In case you have questions about these procedures, make sure to get your answers before 15 July 2021.

Good luck on your exams next week and we wish you a safe and happy summer!

Already over a year we have all been facing a lot of challenges, the Student Affairs Office team hopes you are all doing well.

It is that time of the year again to inform you that as of Tuesday 1 June 2021 you can start booking your courses and projects for the academic year 2021-2022.
It is advisable to book for the whole year at once. Be aware that some courses and projects have prerequisites.
The deadline for booking courses in period 1 and semester project 1 is 25 July 2021.

If you intend to continue with your current study programme(s) in the academic year 2021-2022, you will need to re-register via Studielink before you can register for courses.
Make sure your online student registration for 2021-2022 is fully approved, only then you will be able to register for courses.

·         Step 1: Re-register for your programme via Studielink.
To do so, use the ‘Extend your enrolment’ link in Studielink. You will see this link below the ‘My To Do List’.
Please, do NOT use the ‘New registration request’ link on Studielink. This link is only for first-year registration requests and/or registration for a different programme.
If you have questions about re-registration or tuition fee rates, please check the website. You can also send an email to study@maastrichtuniversity.nl or contact the Call Centre of the Student Services Centre: +31 43 38 85 388.

·         Step 2: Register for courses 2021-2022.
If you wish to participate in education you can start booking courses via the Student Portal > My courses

Don’t know what course to choose? Check out our course catalogue first via the UM website: https://www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/education
-> choose Bachelor’s or Master’s -> choose your programme -> click “See the whole programme” and click “Courses and Curriculum” in the menu on the left.

Note 1: The course on Robotics and Embedded Systems (period 1, KEN3236) will only be given onsite (though the lectures will be online available). Students will work with robotic setups during the labs, so you need to be able to come to DKE.
Because of Covid-19 restrictions, we can only allow 40 students to enter the course, so make sure you register your preferred courses in time. New third year DKE students who take the course the first time will have priority.

Note 2: Resits will take place at the end of semester 1 (24.01.2022 – 28.01.2022), for bachelor year 3, period 4 courses (30.05.2022 – 03.06.2022) and at the end of semester 2 all other courses (27.06.2022 – 01.07.2022).

Ø It is not possible to register only for a single exam (“Exam-only”). If you want to take an exam, you need to register for the course and then you will be automatically registered for the regular (1st attempt) exam.
Course registration will allow you to attend the lectures and it will give you access to the online course materials.
If you wish to be eligible to apply for a resit, you will need to have been booked for the full course prior to the concerned resit.

The Formula Sheet will be provided with the exam. For those of you taking the exam onsite, the Formula Sheet will therefore be in printed form, and for those of you taking the exam online, it will be in electronic form. Online students will not be permitted a printed formula sheet; this is due to the practical difficulty of checking that no modifications have been made from the version provided.

On Thursday, the second phase presentations will take place in Collaborate Ultra.

You will find the sessions via Canvas- Collaborate Ultra.

Please make sure to test your audio and video before the examiners enter the session to avoid any delays.

Please also make sure to include a planning for phase 3 and an overview of who did what in the presentation. Remember, this is your chance to get first-hand-information from the examiners on your plans for phase 3.

We are looking forward to many interesting presentations.

I have finished uploading the lectures on the political economy of AI. The first part introduces political economy and technology by reviewing how Karl Marx provided a framework for thinking about technology, specifically industrial machinery of the 19th century, as part of capitalism. The second part reviews how contemporary writers have used political economy to think about AI and other digital technologies.

This is a topic that is close to my own research interests, so please let me know if you have any questions or, more importantly, have any suggestions for my further reading.

Earlier this week the government announced the good news that the measures for sports activities are being relaxed. What does this mean for UM SPORTS? And again, the self-tests: where to order, how much and how often.

Reopening of University Sports Centre
The University Sports Centre (USC) will reopen its doors on Wednesday 19 May at 13.00. UM SPORTS members will be able to come and exercise again upon reservation. In addition, the number of participants in outdoor sports activities at the USC will be increased to 16 participants per activity. Also, swimming in the Geusseltbad will be possible again upon reservation.

UM SPORTS members have been informed extensively in the UM SPORTS newsletter. For more information or questions, please send an email to umsports@maastrichtuniversity.nl

Self-tests
We have informed you a number of times about the possibility of ordering free COVID-19 self-tests by mail. You can do this using your UM account at www.zelftestonderwijs.nl/. If you experience technical problems when ordering, please send an email to serviceteam@zelftestonderwijs.nl

You can order a maximum of one set of four self-tests per person per week. It is preferable that you only order a self-test if you are sure that you will be visiting one of the UM buildings. This is to ensure that there will be enough self-tests available for people who definitely have to come to UM.

Covid-19 has posed many challenges. One of them has been the transition from onsite to online/ hybrid education. The faculty staff has continuously tried to make these changes as smooth as possible, and ensure that the quality of education at UM remains unaffected by the corona crisis.

However, It has been brought to our attention that some students at FSE are struggling with their assignments in times of corona, to a point where it impacts their mental well being. Concerns were that while the pace of some courses was seemingly reduced, the pace of assignments in those courses remained the same, with an increased burden of self-study workload.

We discussed this at length in the faculty council and came to the following conclusion. Firstly, we recognise that the pandemic has made life more difficult for everyone, staff and students alike. We believe it is our responsibility to ensure to the best of our abilities that every student can continue their education.

Decisions on faculty level have a far-reaching impact and therefore need to be based on sufficient need for intervention. Therefore, we have created this survey to investigate the existence and extent of covid-19 education related issues in our faculty. We will use this to discuss whether faculty level intervention is required and what the right response is.

https://maastrichtuniversity.eu.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_3W9a6EKg672L8zA


In the meantime, here are some steps you can take if you are struggling with the workload or pace of assessment in a particular course:

Reach out to your tutor and the course coordinator
Whenever you are struggling, trust that you can reach out to your tutor and if needed the course coordinator for advice. Keep in mind that the teaching staff is also having to adapt to online education and with fewer contact hours is having a hard time assessing how everyone is faring with it. Therefore, any feedback is needed and appreciated.​

    ​2. Contact the director of studies

If your struggles persist and the course coordinator did not provide a satisfactory answer, you can get in touch with the other students taking the course and see whether they are struggling in a similar manner. If that is the case you can talk to your director of studies. You can find out who that is and how to reach them on the UM website for your programme. Report your struggles to them and the measures you have already taken and they will do their best to help you.

           ​3. Contact the EPC

In case that neither can give a satisfactory response, you can get in touch with the student members of the EPC. They are tasked with maintaining the quality of education of their programme and can give advice on the educational programme in general, but also specific courses, if needed, so do not be afraid to take initiative and reach out.

If you are struggling with your workload, in general, here are some options that you can try to help you along:

Overview of the Services offered by the Library

The library offers a number of services, such as research and writing assistance and can also help you find specialised support for whatever you might be struggling with.

If you are struggling with your wellbeing, here are some options for reaching out for help:

Overview of the Psychological Support offered by UM

Psychological support at UM includes psychological referrals, workshops and more. On the website, you find links to sign up for all of them.

UM Wellbeing Movement

In particular, the wellbeing movement can help against the isolation and disconnect that come along with the lockdown. The link above shows an overview of the regular programme as well as upcoming events.

We hear you and we are doing our best to meet your concerns with sustainable measures.


Stay safe and healthy!

The Students of the FSE faculty council

We would like to invite our students to come back to Maastricht and Venlo in the new academic year. The government wants to help students as much as possible in this difficult time and has therefore decided to reduce the 2021/22 statutory tuition fees by half. From today onwards, you can order free self-tests, and the number of attendees for on-site PhD defences will soon be increased.

Come to Maastricht and Venlo!
A few weeks ago, we let you know that our basic principle still stands: on campus if possible, online if necessary. Nobody can predict exactly what will happen in the coming months and how this will affect our education at the start of the new academic year. But we are confident that we can already invite you to come to Maastricht and Venlo after the summer—because one way or another, we are going to welcome you on campus. Whether it will be for all of your classes and extra-curricular activities or for part of them, we no longer want to just see you on a screen. All of our preparatory work ensures that we can do this safely and responsibly. At the beginning of June, we will know precisely what form our education will take in period 1, but there is no doubt that you will be able to walk around campus again. So, dust off your suitcase; we are going to see each other again in person. And we are really looking forward to it!

Statutory tuition fees for 2021/22 halved
The government wants to help students as much as possible in this time of COVID-19. To streamline that help, a National Education Agreement (NPO) has been drawn up. One of the measures from the NPO is that the statutory tuition fees for the 2021/22 academic year will be reduced by half.

Statutory tuition fees

This 50% reduction applies to the statutory tuition fees, which are the fees that Dutch and EEA students pay for a degree programme in higher education. For 2021/22, the statutory tuition fees were set at €2,168. This amount is now being reduced to €1,084.

First-year bachelor’s students in higher education

If you start in the first year of a bachelor’s programme at a Dutch higher education institution and you are from an EEA country, your fees will be even lower. You have already received a 50% reduction of the statutory tuition fees, and with the new measure you will pay only half of the previously reduced amount. This means that, as a first-year bachelor’s student, €542 is the amount you will pay for statutory tuition fees in the 2021/22 academic year. Different tuition fees apply for University College Maastricht and the Maastricht Science Programme.

University College Maastricht, Maastricht Science Programme and master’s programme in Forensic Psychology

For University College Maastricht, the Maastricht Science Programme and the master’s programme in Forensic Psychology, higher tuition fees apply. On top of the normal statutory tuition fees, a surcharge (an increased amount for the fees) is charged due to the ‘small-scale and intensive’ nature of these programmes. For these programmes, only the statutory tuition fees are reduced by half; the surcharge (the amount of which is determined by the institution) is not reduced by half.

Institutional tuition fees

Institutional tuition fees are determined by the university. These are the fees you pay if you are a non-EEA student or an EEA student who is getting your second bachelor’s or second master’s degree. The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science has called upon all universities to also grant these students a €1,084 reduction in the institutional tuition fees. Like all universities in the Netherlands, we are responding to this call. This means that, as a non-EEA student or an EEA student who is getting your second bachelor’s/master’s degree, your institutional tuition fees will be €1,084 less for the 2021/22 academic year (for part-time students, the institutional tuition fees will be reduced by €772). For example, if you come from Japan and start the bachelor’s programme in International Business at UM in the 2021/22 academic year, your institutional tuition fees for this academic year will be €6,916 instead of €8,000.

As soon as these new tuition fees for the 2021/22 academic year are processed in our systems, we will publish a link to that information in one of the upcoming communication emails. This will be completed sometime in May.

On this page of the Dutch government website, you will find Q&A about the reduction of tuition fees.

Self-tests
As of today, 6 May, students and employees can order free self-tests by mail, even if they live in Belgium or Germany. You can do this using your UM account at www.zelftestonderwijs.nl. This website is available in Dutch and English. You will find instructions in both languages on how to administer the self-test and general information on self-testing.

You can order a maximum of one self-test per person per week. It is preferable that you only order a self-test if you are sure that you will be visiting one of the UM buildings. This is to ensure that there will be enough self-tests available for people who definitely need to come to UM.

For people without a UM account who need to visit a UM building regularly, we will have a (limited) number of self-tests available on site. The distribution of these will be handled within each organisational unit. More information about this will be given as soon as possible.

The use of a self-test is and will remain voluntary. By using a self-test, you will be helping to detect corona infections quickly and contributing to a safer environment within UM. You do not need to provide proof of a negative test result in order to enter the UM buildings. The self-tests are an addition to the existing corona measures within UM. Also for this, we appeal to your sense of responsibility: if you have symptoms or have been in contact with someone who has tested positive, please go to the GGD for a test. In any case, the self-test should not be a replacement for the GGD test if you are experiencing symptoms!

15 attendees at PhD defences
Since 26 April, it has been possible to hold PhD defences on site with a maximum of 3 attendees. But from 17 May onwards, PhD candidates can welcome 15 attendees at their defence ceremony. The Office of Academic Ceremonies (BAZ) will contact the relevant PhD candidates directly about the related guidelines. Of course, all COVID-19 rules are to be strictly followed during the on-site ceremonies.

Dear students,   We hope you are well!   As you may know, this week it became clear that universities are allowed to have more on campus activities, per April 26, 2021, for one day per week. You have received an overview of what this means via the general UM mail. While it will take some time for all the details to become clear, we would like to inform you about what this means for DKE at this moment.   Regarding period 5 courses, we have decided to keep lectures fully online. However, we will allow lecturers to offer some of the practical components (tutorials/computer classes) hybrid. Whether this is possible remains to be seen, as it depends among others on the nature of the component, the safety requirements for the lecturer and the students, the availability of suitable spaces, the size of the classes, and the scheduling constraints that the one-day-in-a-week rule imposes. That means that you may receive some course specific information about this in the upcoming weeks. In case you hear nothing before May 1, it is safe to assume that your course will continue as originally planned.   Needless to say, we very much look forward to welcoming you on campus. That's why, together with Incognito, we are looking into what extra-curricular / social activities could be safely organized onsite for groups of students no larger than 50. Your ideas for covid-proof, on campus activities are very welcome: feel free to contact Incognito about them.   We would also like to remind you that project rooms have been open already since some days now, to welcome students who wish to work together on their semester projects. Our plan is to keep those open. On top of that, study spaces at PHS1 are also available.   We will keep you updated.   Stay safe!   Best, Matus and Pietro

This mail is intended for students who are familiar with or need to be familiar with LaTeX text editors for the production and publishing of scientific documentation. Maybe using a LaTeX text editor for writing theses or papers is part of your daily work. Maybe you only use it occasionally, e.g. as part of an editor role. In either case, the University Library is very interested in your feedback and kindly asks you to fill in the accompanying survey. With the survey results, we want to investigate whether a campus license for an online LaTeX editor is feasible. Because of the limited range of tools, the survey focusses on Papeeria and Overleaf. At the end of the survey, we kindly request to fill in your role within the UM and the faculty you are affiliated with so we can get a better understanding of the UM online LaTeX user base.

All period 2 exams will be booked for you on campus by default.

Only students who are currently following education online have received a 30-seconds' survey about the period 2 exams. Please make sure you respond this Sunday 8 November at the latest if you need to take the exams online as well.

For open books exams: only hard copies of the course materials are allowed. Because of UM protocols during the covid-19 pandemic, the paper exams need to be quarantined for at lease 72 hours before they can be reviewed.
This means that the 15 working days which are set for publishing your grade needed to be extended with 5 extra working days. Good luck on your exams!

Rules	and	Regulations	Master
Programmes	DKE
Rules and Regulations governing the examinations for the Master’s
programmes in Artificial Intelligence and in Data Science for Decision Making of
Maastricht University, approved by the Board of Examiners of the department
of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering of Maastricht University. These
Rules and Regulations take effect on 1 September 2020
2
Section	1 General	Provisions
Article	1 Applicability	of	the	rules	and	regulations
1. These rules and regulations apply to the education, exams and examinations
for the full-time Master’s programmes in Artificial Intelligence and Data
Science for Decision Making (formerly known as Operations Research), as
further defined in the Education and Examination Regulations of the School of
Information Technology (Knowledge Engineering, Computer Science,
Mathematics and ICT) and/or in the Education and Examination Regulations
of the Department of Data Science & Knowledge Engineering in the Faculty
of Science and Engineering, at Maastricht University hereinafter referred to as
EER.
2. The rules and regulations apply to all students who are registered for the above
mentioned master’s programmes and to students from other programmes,
faculties or institutions of higher education as well as contract students, insofar
as they follow components of the programmes to which these rules and
regulations apply.
3. The rules and regulations are each year adjusted and enacted by the Board of
Examiners.
Article	2 Definitions
The definitions used in these rules and regulations are the same as those used in the
EER,with the following changes/additions:
• Teaching team All persons involved in teaching the course
• Assessment committee Committee tasked with providing expert advice
on assessement
• Assessment plan Plan describing the assessment of a component
• Component A study unit of the programme within the
meaning of the Act
• Course A component of 6 ECTS at DKE offered during
block 1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.5, 2.1, 2.2, not being a research project
Article	3 Appointment	and	composition	of	the	Board	of	Examiners
1. The dean installs the Board of Examiners and appoints its members on the
basis of their expertise in the field of the two programmes. At least one
member is a lecturer in one of the programmes.
2. The Board of Examiners contains one external member, who is not connected
to the Faculty of Science and Engineering.
3. The Board of Examiners appoints a chair from among its members. An
external member cannot be the chair.
3
Article	4 Board	of	Examiners:	decision	process
1. The Board of Examiners approves decisions on the basis of a majority vote.
The quorum for a meeting is 50% of the members. In the event of a tie, the
(acting) chair’s vote will be the deciding vote.
2. If a conflict of interest might arise if a member of the board of examiners is
also an examiner in an inquiry into fraud or an exam, that member will recuse
himself from that inquiry and abstain from voting.
3. If a conflict of interest might arise for a member of the board of examiners, in
granting a request to a student would have a negative effect for that member,
that member will abstain from voting.
4. The Board of Examiners can delegate decision powers to individual members.
Article	5 Examiners
1. The Board of Examiners appoints at least one examiner per component for
administering exams, assessments and/or practicals. The examiner(s)
provide(s) the Board of Examiners with the information requested.
2. The examiners are responsible for the following tasks:
a. defining the assessment plan (see Article 7);
b. preparing the exams, assessments and/or practicals;
c. assessing and determining the results of exams, assessments and/or
practicals taken by students;
d. providing the administration office with all the necessary information
to award the exam, assessment and/or practical results;
e. determining the time(s) and place(s) for exam/assessment inspection
by the students of the assessment of written exams or the notes on oral
exams.
3. The examiner can, without losing his/her full responsibility, have other
members of the teaching team perform tasks belonging to an examination
component.
4. When performing the tasks for the relevant components as stipulated in
paragraph 2, the examiners and members of the teaching teams must observe
the Act, the regulations contained within or arising from the EER, and the
present rules and regulations.
5. The examiners are responsible for providing study information including
information on the form of the exam, assessment and/or practical to the
student through the Student Portal in a timely fashion, and at the start of a
study component.
6. Examiners are obliged to report fraud or a suspicion of fraud to the Board of
Examiners.
7. The Board of Examiners can discharge examiners at any time.
4
Article	6 Assessment Committee
The Assessment Committee provides examiners with expert advice on assessment,
checks the quality of exams and assessments and checks constructive alignment of
courses/components and their assessment. The Assessment Committee reports to the
Board of Examiners in all matters regarding quality of assessment.
Article	7 Assessment	plan
The assessment of each course is described in an assessment plan. This plan describes
the intended learning outcomes of each course in terms of Dublin descriptors and how
they are aligned with the examination. It also describes the assessment procedure for
the regular exam and the resit and how the final grade of a course is calculated. If the
assessment is different from or additional to a written exam, the assessment plan also
indicates how fraud is prevented and detected. Each year the assessment plan needs to
be submitted to the Assessment Committee. Minor changes will be approved by the
Assessment Committee, major changes by the Director of Studies and the Chair of the
Board of Examiners with advice from the Assessment Committee and the Chair of the
Programme Committee. In expediting circumstances, the Board of Examiners can
approve changes without consulting others.
Article	8 Communication
1. The Student Portal, UM Intranet, email through UM addresses, and formal
letters are the only official forms of communication with students.
2. All course/component information, including course descriptions and exam
methods, will be available on the Student Portal from the start of each block
(cf. Article 5.5).
3. Changes to the course/component information will be posted as
announcements in the Student Portal in a timely fashion.
4. Students must regularly check and maintain Student Portal, UM Intranet, and
their UM email account. Links given in the Student Portal and UM Intranet to
web pages outside the Student Portal do not count as information postings.
Forwarding an email to another email address does not count as maintaining
the UM email.
Section	2 Exams/grading,	overall	assessment
Article	9 Assessments
Assessments of the components (including skills training, research projects, and
internships) shall be in accordance with section 5 of the EER. At the start of each
component, the students are informed (through the Student Portal and/or email) of the
assessment criteria, insofar as these are not contained within or arise from the EER,
the present rules and regulations, or the Student handbook. Each exam of a
component may contain one item covering material from a previous component (i.e. a
review question). This item may be worth a maximum of 10% of the grade. For
5
regular courses, bonus assignments can be given with a maximum of 10% of the
grade. Group assignments (outside research projects) can be given with a maximum
of 30% of the grade.
Article	10 Grade	descriptors
The exam/assessment results of study components (including courses, research
projects and internships) and the thesis are assigned on a 10-point scale, where a
result of at least a 6.0/10 represents a pass. Whole grades are awarded to exams. Both
half and whole grades can be awarded for study components of at least 10 ECTS as
well as for research projects.
The descriptors of the different grades:
10-points Descriptor UK US
10 Outstanding A* A+
9.5 A* A+
9 Very Good A* A+
8.5 A* A+
8 Good A A
7.5 A- A
7 More than satisfactory B B+
6.5 C B
6 Satisfactory D C
5.5 E D
5 Almost satisfactory F F
4 Unsatisfactory F F
3 Very unsatisfactory F F
2 Poor F F
1 Very Poor F F
A label NG (“no grade”) can be assigned when assessment is incomplete and no result
can be assigned or as a consequence of plagiarism or academic dishonesty. Exams
that students have not timely deregistered for on the Student Portal, will be regarded
as an incomplete assessment. An NG automatically constitutes a fail and no credit is
awarded.
Examiners are instructed to grade in accordance with the Dutch grading culture.
Article	11 Master’s	examination
1. After all examination components have been administered, the results of the
master’s examination will be determined by the Board of Examiners.
2. To pass the master’s examination, the student must:
a. receive a grade of 6.0/10 or higher for all exams/assessments.
b. receive a grade of 6.0/10 or higher for the master’s thesis.
3. If a student has studied for a period longer than six years or when doubts are
raised by examiners or project coordinators whether the student has achieved
6
certain intended learning outcomes, the Board of Examiners can launch an
investigation into whether the student has mastered all intended learning
outcomes, and if not, deny finalizing examination.
Article	12 Resits
Each academic year, there are two opportunities for each exam. For research projects
there are separate regulations, which are included in Article 7 of the Research Project
Regulations. In case of a resit the highest grade obtained counts. Once a student
successfully passes an exam, in principle he/she cannot re-sit the exam except after
approval of the Board of Examiners. If the student wants to resit an exam in this case,
she/he must submit a written request, by regular mail or email, explaining the reason
to the Board of Examiners by at least 15 calendar days before the start of the resit
period.
For resitting separate sub-tests and assignments within a failed exam the following
guidelines hold:
1. Sub-tests and assignments that were passed within an exam, which was not
passed, will lose their validity after the academic year in which they were
passed unless the Board of Examiners states otherwise.
2. The examiner decides upon content and form of the resit.
3. In case subtests/assignments are offered as a resit separately, passed sub-tests
and assignments (i.e. 6.0 or higher) cannot be resit.
4. When computing the grade for the full exam, the highest grade of each subtest / assignment is taken into account.
5. A resit opportunity should always be offered for failed subtests and
assignments. Such an opportunity can be offered in a different way than the
original one.
6. Resits are not offered for bonus assignments.
7. Requirements to make a reasonable attempt during the regular opportunity for
a practical (assignment) in courses, in order to be eligible for a resit of that
practical (assignment) must be approved by the Board of Examiners on a yearto-year basis.
Examiner(s) can set a maximum grade that can be obtained for a resit of a subtest or assignment. That resit has then the form of a repair assignment or repair
test.
Article	13 Assessment	in	exceptional	cases
1. The assessment in exceptional cases as meant in article 5.8 of the EER will
take place during semester 1 for courses from semester 2 and during semester
2 for courses from semester 1. The exact moment of this assessment is
determined by the Board of Examiners.
2. Requests for this assessment must be filed by the student to the Board of
Examiners within two weeks after becoming eligible for making such a
request.
3. Notwithstanding the minimal requirements in article 5.8 of the EER, the
student must argue in his/her request that (s)he has a reasonable chance of
7
passing this assessment without retaking the course, and argue that (s)he has
taken all possible efforts to pass the component at hand.
4. Components that are offered by other parties than DKE, and students that are
from a different programme, are not eligible for this assessment.
5. Assessment in exceptional cases does not apply to research projects.
6. Assessment in exceptional cases is only offered once.
7. Assessment in exceptional cases does not apply if there is a reason to assume
that the delay is due invalidation or exclusion of exam (results) due to fraud
either directly or indirectly.
Article	14 Exemption	from	exams/assessments
1. A request for exemption must be submitted in writing with the reason stated to
the chair of the Board of Examiners. A request must be accompanied with as
much written information and evidence concerning the relevant study
programme or work experience as possible.
2. The Board of Examiners may consult the relevant examiners before making
their decision regarding the request.
3. The Board of Examiners shall decide within 20 working days of receiving the
request, and immediately inform the requester of this decision.
Article	15 Exam	results:	amendment
Examiners may amend grades one by one grade step (i.e. for courses a single grade
point). In special cases, the Board of Examiners may approve additional or larger
amendments of the results of an exam determined by one or more examiners.
Article	16 Exam	inspection
The student has, in accordance with Article 5.11 of the EER the right to inspect their
evaluated work. The examiner can choose to either
1. organize a collective inspection hour or
2. have the students request an appointment within 10 working days after the
announcement of the exam results.
In the case of a collective inspection hour, students that have attended can request a
follow-up individual inspection. In case of a pressing ground for not being able to
attend the collective inspection hour (e.g. overlapping classes or medical
appointments, but NOT work or holiday), an individual appointment can be requested
within the timeframe as stipulated under 2). Collective inspection hours are
announced at least 5 working days in advance on Student Portal.
Article	17 GPA
8
The GPA is computed as the weighted average score over all exams that are listed as
part of the programme and have been originally marked with a Dutch grade on a tenpoint scale, taking into account that
1. an exam for which a failing grade is obtained is also included in the GPA,
although no credits are listed on the Student Portal;
2. if more than one grade is listed for an exam, the highest grade is taken into
account for the calculation;
3. grades for research projects are excluded from the GPA
4. extracurricular courses are not included in the GPA.
Article	18 Certificate
1. Students shall be awarded a certificate/diploma for all examinations that they
complete successfully, as stipulated in the Higher Education and Research
Act.
2. The following statements may be added to the results:
a. “cum laude”, if the student has received a minimum grade of 7.0 for all
of the exams of the master’s overall assessment (included in the GPA
computation) at each first exam opportunity, has received a minimum
grade of 8.5 for the thesis at first opportunity and has a weighted
average of 8.0 or higher, and if the overall exams together represent a
minimum of 60 ECTS;
b. “summa cum laude”, if the student has received a minimum grade of
7.5 for all of the exams of the master’s overall assessment (included in
the GPA computation) at each first exam opportunity, has received a
minimum grade of 9.0 for the thesis at first opportunity and has a
weighted average of a 9.0 or higher, and if the overall exams together
represent a minimum of 60 ECTS.
These predicates can also be awarded at the discretion of the Board of
Examiners
3. Students who committed fraud/plagiarism and whose exam, as a consequence,
is declared invalid or who have been excluded from exams, are excluded from
the (Summa) Cum Laude degree predicates.
4. “first exam opportunity” in sub 2. means that all exams have to be taken in the
year of enrolment that corresponds to the course year of the exam, and that no
earlier exam result exists. Not showing up for a registered exam does yield a
result in the form of a No Grade (NG) unless the student has deregistered the
exam on time.
Article	18a Certificate for	students	affected	by	the	COVID-19	closure	of
the	university
For students that have started in September 2018, February 2019, September 2019 or
February 2020 and are studying without study delay; i.e. graduating the latest by
August 2020, January 2021, August 2021 or January 2022 respectively, the following
provision holds:
1. Students shall be awarded a certificate/diploma for all examinations that they
complete successfully, as stipulated in the Higher Education and Research
Act.
9
2. The following predicates may be added to the certificate by the Board of
Examiners:
a. “cum laude”, if the student
i. has received a minimum grade of 7.0 for all of the exams of the
master’s overall assessment (included in the GPA computation)
at each first exam opportunity. Here the minimum grade
requirement does not hold for exam results obtained during the
spring semester of 2019/2020;
ii. has received a minimum grade of 8.5 for the thesis, or a
minimum grade of 8.0 for students who did the majority of
their thesis work in the spring semester of 2020;
iii. and has a weighted average of 8.00 or higher; or has a weighted
average of 8.00 or higher for the courses passed outside of the
spring semester of 2019/2020, as long as they represent a
minimum of 24 ECTS;
iv. and if the overall exams together represent a minimum of 60
ECTS.
b. “summa cum laude”, if the student
i. has received a minimum grade of 8.0 in all of the exams of the
master’s overall assessment (included in the GPA computation)
at each first exam opportunity, Here the minimum grade
requirement does not hold for exam results of the spring
semester of 2019/2020;
ii. has received a minimum grade of 9.0 for the thesis or a
minimum grade of 8.5 for students who did the majority of
their thesis work in the spring semester of 2019/2020;
iii. and has a weighted average of 9.00 or higher; or has a weighted
average of 9.00 or higher for the courses passed outside of the
spring semester of 2019/2020, as long as they represent a
minimum of 24 ECTS;
iv. and if the overall exams together represent a minimum of 60
ECTS.
These predicates can also be awarded at the discretion of the Board of
Examiners.
3. Students who committed fraud/plagiarism and whose exam, as a consequence,
is declared invalid or who have been excluded from exams, are excluded from
the (Summa) Cum Laude degree predicates.
4. “first exam opportunity” in sub 2 means that all exams have to be taken in the
year of enrolment that corresponds to the course year of the exam, and that no
earlier exam result exists. Not showing up for a registered exam does yield a
result in the form of a No Grade (NG), unless the student has deregistered the
exam on time. First failed attempts in the spring semester of 2019/2020 are
disregarded.
Article	19 Assessment	by	committees
For components that are in principle graded by committees on basis of consensus the
following holds if consensus within the committee is not possible:
10
1. If there is consensus amongst the DKE staff members/examiners, that consensus
determines the grade.
2. If the grade of DKE staff members/examiners differs by no more than 1 grade
point, the average of the grade determines the grade of the component.
3. If the grade of DKE staff members/examiners differs by more than 1 grade
point, the median of the grade determines the grade of the component. For this,
at least three DKE staff members must be part of the committee. If this is not
yet the case, the examiner(s) must contact the Board of Examiners to add an
additional staff member to the committee.
Article	20 Electives outside	DKE
The Board of Examiners will take into account when considering requests for
electives outside DKE
a) whether the proposed elective plan is feasible
b) whether the proposed electives contribute to the learning
goals/qualifications of the programme
c) whether the proposed electives overlap with other components
d) the study progress of the student
e) the motivation letter.
Article	21 Study	Abroad
1. Due to the fact that arrangements for study abroad have to be made in an earlier
stage, there must be a high probability that the inclusion requirement from Article
5.3 of the EER, will be met at the end of the academic year. Therefore, to be
considered for exchange:
a. after block 3 of year 1, students wanting to go on exchange should have
already obtained 22 ECTS from year 1
b. The Research Project from the student’s first semester must be
successfully completed with credit points being awarded
c. The Board of Examiners can deviate from a) in cases that a student has
applied for a university that is an Erasmus partner.
2. The Board of Examiners selects the students to be nominated for exchange from
the pool of applicants. The Board of Examiners selects students based on the
criteria stated in Article 20 and on past academic and non-academic conduct.
3. Any allocation of exchange partners is conditional on the requirements of Article
5.3 of the EER and meeting those conditions is the responsibility of the student.
Section	3 Procedures
Article	22 Exams
1. Students must register in time for their education, exams and re-sits. If they
miss the deadline, they cannot participate in the exam. if exceptional
11
circumstances prevented registering, they are eligible for dispensation. Valid
exceptional circumstances are:
a. Illness and/or pregnancy/delivery (proven by a medical statement /
sufficient proof in writing of the illness throughout the entire
registration period);
b. Proven poignant personal circumstances (for instance the death of a
direct family member);
c. Other circumstances leading to unfair treatment if they have not been
taken into account
2. Students must adhere to the booking instructions for registering.
3. The Board of Examiners shall ensure that there is at least one invigilator
present during written exams.
4. A student who is denied entrance entry to the exam (location) will not be
awarded any results for the exam in question and therefore receives an NG.
5. The student must follow any instructions given by the Board of Examiners, the
examiner or the invigilator at all times. If the central testing facilities are used,
the check whether a student is admissible to the exam may be performed
afterwards. If in that case the student turns out to be inadmissible, the exam is
invalidated and remains ungraded.
6. A place is reserved for each registered student. Student can take their place 15
minutes before the exam or earlier if the exam location is opened earlier.
7. Students will not be admitted to the exam (location) after the official start of
the exam. Students may not leave the (location) until 30 minutes after the
official start of the exam. As soon as a student has left the exam location,
she/he will not be allowed to re-enter the location. If a student wants to leave
the location for a short period, she/he must follow the instructions given by the
invigilator. Starting from half an hour before the end of the exam, students
must remain seated until the invigilator has collected the work from their
table. After this, the students may leave the exam location.
8. Students may only participate in an exam if they can provide a valid and
undamaged proof of identity, which must be placed on the table so that it is
clearly visible. If a student cannot provide proof of identity during the exam,
the student can be refused entry and the Board of Examiners will be informed
who may declare the student’s exam null and void (i.e. label NG).
9. Instructions on how to fill in the exam are given on the answer form and in the
exam booklet. The forms cannot be processed if students ignore these
instructions, use different writing devices than instructed, change the details
printed on the forms or make notes elsewhere on the answer form. The
consequences of not following the instructions are entirely the student’s own
responsibility. If students suspect that there are inaccuracies, they must report
this to the invigilator.
10. Students may not use red pens.
11. Unless the Board of Examiners has specified elsewhere, the student may not
bring any aids into the exam location and/or use these during the exam. A
student who has written permission from the Board of Examiners to use aids
must inform the examiner or invigilator present before the start of each exam
and must always be able to provide a copy of this document. Maastricht
University is expressly exempt from any liability for damage to or loss of aids
that have been confiscated.
12
12. In the event of irregularities and/or fraud, the invigilator informs the student
and reports on the irregularities and/or fraud in a written form. Immediately
after the exam the student reads the report and either agrees by signing or
contests by writing down his/her observation of the events. The Board of
Examiners will be informed after the exam of any irregularities and violations
that took place before, during or after the exam. The Board of Examiners may
decide to take further sanctions and/or measures.
13. In the event of irregularities that hinder further proper examining, the
invigilator is authorised to confiscate the exam materials including any
answer forms and exclude the student from further participation in the exam.
The Board of Examiners will be informed after the exam of any irregularities
and violations that took place before, during or after the exam. The Board of
Examiners may decide to take further sanctions and/or measures.
14. The exam and answer form must be handed in by the official end of the exam
or as indicated by the invigilator. After students have handed in their answer
form, they must leave the exam location as quickly and quietly as possible.
15. Students may bring a reasonable amount of prepared food and drinks. Food
and drinks that student have brought to the hall may be consumed during the
exam, provided that no disturbing amount of noise is made and there is no
littering. All items that the student brings along must fit and be placed,
together with the exam materials, on the table provided to the student.
16. If the collective testing facilities are used, the rules specified by “the Rules of
Procedure for Examinations” apply, which may be more restrictive.
17. For proctored exams and take-home exams, additional rules may be imposed,
including conditions when the exam is considered to be (in)valid.
18. For cases regarding exams not covered by these rules and regulations “the
Rules of Procedure for Examinations” apply.
Article	22a Assessment	during	COVID-19
1. After receiving approval from the Board of Examiners, Examiners can use
alternative assessment formats or proctored exams for courses who’s
assessment is affected by COVID-19.
2. To ensure quality of examination, Examiners can investigate students
• if there are specific indications that fraud may have occurred fraud
during an assessment;
• if the score of an assessment component is not consistent with the
grade history of a student, or
• randomly.
This investigation can be held on-line as an additional oral exam, in the
presence of the examiner and a second DKE staff member that holds an
appointment as an examiner, or in a different appropriate way. If the student is
unable to satisfactory answer questions on the assessment components he/she
made, the examiner can request the Board of Examiners to declare the
examination invalid. If the student refuses to cooperate, the assessment is
considered incomplete and the student receives an NG.
3. For proctored exams and take-home exams, additional rules may be imposed,
including conditions when the examination is considered to be (in)valid.
13
4. Any student passing components during alternative assessment is a candidate
for investigation by the Board of Examiners as described in Article 6.1
paragraph 2 of the EER.
Article	23 Fraud	including plagiarism	and	fabricating	and/or	research
data
In accordance to Article 7.12b paragraph 3 of the Act, the Board of Examiners can act
under Article 7.12b paragraph 2 of the Act as follows:
1. The Board of Examiners may impose one of the disciplinary measures set
down in paragraph 8 of this article if it establishes that a student, in any exam
or exam component:
a. has had any unauthorised aids/devices at his or her disposal, or has
used unauthorised aids and/or (communication) devices as mentioned
in the exam instructions and/or Rules of Procedures for Exams;
b. has communicated or tried to communicate with another student
without permission from an invigilator, examiner, or Board of
Examiners member;
c. has copied or attempted to copy from another student, or has provided
the opportunity to copy;
d. has posed as someone else or let someone else pose as him/her;
e. has deliberately misled, or at least attempted to mislead or provided the
opportunity to mislead an invigilator, an examiner, a corrector or the
Board of Examiners with respect to the exam;
f. has disregarded the instructions of the invigilator or the instructions for
the exam (component) such that an unfair advantage might have been
obtained;
g. has performed actions or omissions which make it impossible in whole
or in part to properly evaluate his/her knowledge, understanding and/or
skills.
2. The Board of Examiners may impose one of the disciplinary measures set
down in paragraph Error! Reference source not found. of this article if it
establishes that a student:
a) has falsified the information on mandatory attendance, participation or
effort obligation; or had someone else falsify that information; or has
signed off on attendance, participation or effort obligation when it was
not (fully) met;
b) has falsified exam results;
c) has collaborated on a graded assignment, paper or practical, whereas
this was not allowed;
d) has falsely obtained, or attempted to, access to an exam;
e) has mislead an examiner relating to exam (components), registration,
or grading;
f) has facilitated other students to engage in fraud.
3. The Board of Examiners may impose one of the disciplinary measures set
down in paragraph 8 of this article if it establishes that a student has
committed plagiarism in any exam, part or component, including:
a. using or copying his/her personal or other people’s texts, data, ideas or
thoughts without adequate reference to the source;
14
b. presenting the structure or central body of thought from others without
adequate reference to the source and thus passing it off as his/her own;
c. not clearly indicating in the text, for example via quotation marks or a
certain layout, that verbatim or nearly verbatim quotes have been used;
d. paraphrasing the content of his/her own or other people’s texts without
adequate reference to the source;
e. copying video, audio or test material, software and program codes
from others without adequate reference to the source and thus passing
them off as his/her own;
f. copying work from other students and thus passing it off as his/her
own;
g. submitting work or assignments acquired from or written by a third
party (whether or not for payment) and thus passing them off as his/her
own.
4. The Board of Examiners may impose one of the disciplinary measures set
down in paragraph 8 of this article if it establishes that a student has fabricated
and/or falsified survey or interview answers or research data.
5. During the exam inspection students are not allowed to have communication
devices and/or other electronic devices at their disposal, neither to take the
exam and answer key outside the room where the inspection takes place nor to
copy these documents in any form. Also, students are not allowed to make any
modifications to the exam. The Board of Examiners may impose one of the
disciplinary measures set down in paragraph 8 of this article if it establishes
that a student did not adhere to these rules.
6. In case of fraud / plagiarism in group assignments, all students in the group are
in principle responsible for fraud / plagiarism unless it is clear that only one
student has committed fraud. In that case only the student in question will be
penalized.
7. In the event that the Board of Examiners suspects that a student has committed
fraud in any way, the Board of Examiners shall be entitled to start the
following procedure: the (acting) chair of the Board of Examiners opens an
inquiry into the established facts, and may call in an expert to do so. After this
inquiry has been closed, but within 15 working days after fraud has been
reported to the Board of Examiners by the examiner(s), the chair will inform
the members of the Board of Examiners, and give the student and the
examiner(s) the opportunity to each state their cases. The student may have an
adviser accompany him/her. If the Board of Examiners establishes that a
student has committed, the board will declare the relevant exams/assessment
and/or attendance registration null and void (label NG) and can impose a
measure as set down in paragraph 8. The Board of Examiners will inform the
department and the student involved regarding this measure and the reason on
which this measure is based. This procedure shall take place in accordance
with Article 7.12b of the Act.
8. In the cases referred to in paragraphs 0 to 7 the Board of Examiners can
declare the results of the relevant exam or part in question and/or the
attendance registration invalid, as well as impose the following disciplinary
measures:
• a reprimand;
• exclusion from participation or further participation in one or more
exams in the programme for a period of at most one year;
15
• in serious cases of fraud, the Board of Examiners can propose to the
UM’s Executive Board that the student(s) concerned be permanently
deregistered from the programme.
9. Repeat offenses of fraud are considered an aggravating circumstance and may
result in more severe sanctions. This includes also fraud in components that
were taken at other faculties or institutions of higher education, since Boards
of Examiners will inform each other regarding fraud.
10. Before the Board of Examiners imposes an appropriate disciplinary measure,
or makes a proposal to the Executive Board, the student in question is given
the opportunity to be heard.
11. If fraud is established, this is included in the student’s dossier.
12. If, after investigation, it is ultimately determined that the student concerned
did not commit fraud, the names will be removed from the correspondence
about the alleged fraud and the correspondence will not be included in the
student’s dossier.
13. The Board of Examiners does not grant exemptions on the grounds of study
results obtained elsewhere while the student was excluded from participating
in the programme’s exams because fraud was committed.
14. A student who was excluded from participation in exams, or whose exam was
declared invalid for a component due to fraud, is not eligible for assessment in
exceptional cases for those components for which the student was excluded.
Article	24 Participation
1. Events that are considered practicals as defined in Article 7.13(2)(t) of the Act
may require active participation. Students are assessed for this element of the
practical (assignments) in terms of pass/fail.
2. For participation in an on-line setting, it is required that students are visible on
camera, such that participation can be verified.
Section	4 Closing	provisions
Article	25 Amendments
1. Amendments to these rules and regulations shall be determined by the Board
of Examiners by means of a separate decision.
2. Amendments will in principle not be made to the current academic year,
unless it may reasonably be assumed that the interests of the students will not
be harmed as a result, or when necessary to ensure the quality of the exams.
Article	26 Entry	into	force
These rules and regulations shall enter into force as of 1 September 2020 and hold
until new Rules and Regulations are published.
16
Research	project	regulations
Research project regulations for the Master’s programmes in Artificial
Intelligence and Data Science for Decision Making, of the Department of Data
Science and Knowledge Engineering of the Faculty of Science and Engineering,
at Maastricht University, approved by the Board of Examiners.
17
Article	1 Applicability	of	the	rules	and	regulations
These rules and regulations apply to the research projects for the Master’s
programmes Artificial Intelligence and Data Science for Decision Making, as further
defined in the Education and Examination Regulations, hereinafter referred to as
EER. These rules and regulations apply only for the research projects and not for
group assignments within a course
Article	2 Definitions
• project examiner(s): the person(s) who set the requirements for the different
aspects of the research project and award the results within the legal
framework.
• project supervisor(s): the person(s) who provide content-based supervision
during the research projects
• project teaching team: all members of the academic staff who are involved in
the research projects. The teaching team includes project examiners, project
coordinators, project supervisors and lecturers;
• research project: an education component, as defined in Article 7.13(2)(t) of
the act, where students work in small groups on complex and challenging
assignments in order to develop a variety of skills. The research project
spreads out over one semester (or multiple blocks). They are usually group
projects, but individual projects may also occur.
• project group: a small group of students that jointly work on a research
project. Project groups can also consist of a single member.
• project coordinator: the person responsible for the daily management of the
research project in a certain year or certain semester during a year;
• project tutor: the person responsible for the daily management of a project
group in a certain semester or certain block during a semester;
• project meeting: an education activity, as defined in Article 7.13(2)(t) of the
act; a scheduled meeting between the project tutor and the project group,
aimed at learning to manage research projects.
• skills training: an education activity, as defined in Article 7.13(2)(t) of the act;
skills training that is part of the project as referred to as “project skill” in the
EER.
Article	3 Research	projects
1. The project coordinator is responsible for the daily management of the
research project; regularly communicates and consults with the teaching team,
in particular the project supervisors and examiners; is responsible for the
attendance and participation registration for compulsory project meetings
(which are indicated in these regulations); distributes information at the start
of the research project; determines project group composition; and ensures that
the students are given feedback after each assessment.
18
2. At the start of the research project these meetings shall be announced in
writing by email or posted on the Student Portal. The project supervisors
supervise the students using a process-based and a content-based approach.
3. Students whose behaviour is still detrimental after receiving a formal warning
from the project coordinator can be expelled from the research project. They
are not allowed to take a project resit.
Article	4 Attendance	and	participation
Attendance and participation in the project meetings and, if applicable, project skills
trainings, is mandatory. Missing a meeting/training in this article means failure to be
present during part of or the complete meeting/training, inadequate participation or
inadequately making the assignments. For project meetings the project tutor of project
coordinator decides whether a student missed it or not, and for the skill trainings the
lecturer or project coordinator.
One project meeting may be missed each block of the three blocks of a semester,
without consequences. If two project meetings in a block are missed, 0.5 points will
be subtracted from the final grade. If three or more meetings are missed in a block, an
NG will be awarded and the student will fail the project and will be ineligible for a
resit and will have to retake the project in the next academic year. If one skills
training is missed, 0.5 point will be subtracted from the final grade, if two trainings
are missed, 1.0 point will be subtracted from the final grade. If three or more trainings
are missed, an NG will be awarded and the student will fail the project and will be
ineligible for a resit and will have to retake the project in the next academic year.
Missed skill trainings are counted per semester.
Article	5 Examiners
The Board of Examiners appoints project examiner(s) to assess the research project
for each project group. A project examiner may coincide with the project coordinator.
The project examiners determine the grade according to a pre-agreed procedure and
set extra assignments when needed. At least one of the examiners acts as a project
supervisor for the same research project.
Article	6 Project	grade
1. The research project is graded on three occasions by the examiners. The first
grade is issued after the first phase presentation and accounts for 15% of the
final grade. The second grade is issued after the second phase presentation and
accounts for 15% of the final grade. The third grade is issued after the final
assessment at the end of the third block using an item-based form. This grade
accounts for 70% of the final grade.
2. As indicated in the previous paragraph, for each project there are a number of
assessment moments that may include, but are not limited to: the presentation
first phase, the presentation second phase, the final presentation and the
product and report examination. Failure to be participate at either the
presentation first phase or presentation second phase has the consequence of
19
1.0 point being subtracted from the final grade of the student involved. Failure
to participate at either the final project presentation or the product and report
examination has the consequence of 3.0 points being subtracted from the final
grade of the student involved. Failure to participate in at two of these
assessment moments leads to an automatic NG for the student involved for the
overall project, without the possibility of a resit.
3. The final assessment includes the final presentation, the written report and the
product and will be based on the following aspects:
a. the project management and cooperation;
b. the academic skills;
c. the professional skills;
d. the communication;
e. participation;
f. the grades from earlier project phases.
The requirements for the project product, report and presentation are
determined by the project examiners.
4. The project grade is a group grade, which applies to all members of the group.
The project examiners may deviate (positively or negatively) from the group
grade and issue an individual grade for students, if participation and
cooperation within a group has not been homogeneous.
5. Examiners can choose to use peer assessment for adjusting individual grades.
6. For students who have not met the project requirements by insufficient
attendance or participation in project meetings, skill trainings, project
presentations, the product and report assessments and any other mandatory
meetings, the modification to the student’s grade as indicated in Error!
Reference source not found. and in Error! Reference source not found..2
will be applied after the individual grading of the student.
Article	7 Project	grade:	written	motivation
The final project grade will be justified in terms of the following themes: project
management and cooperation, academic skills, professional skills and communication,
using an item-based form. This form will be communicated to the students.
Article	8 Resits
The resit method shall be determined by the examiners. Resits can be individual or on
a group level, where changes will be permitted to the composition of the original
project group. Students who were expelled from the project or that did not receive a
grade in the current academic year are not allowed to take the project resit. A resit
opportunity will only be offered if the grade is 4.0 or more (hence an NG is ineligible
for a resit) to ensure that a student has obtained sufficient practical training. The
student(s) will receive the resit assignment from the examiners within 2 working days
after failing the project. This additional assignment must be handed in within 15
working days.
20
Article	9 Hardship
The Board of Examiners can excuse students from the participation in
examination/assessment moments and other mandatory meetings in individual cases
due to personal circumstances, but can, in consultation with the examiners, deviate
from the group grade in such cases. The Board of Examiners can also grant resits for
projects in special circumstances.
21
Internship	regulations
Internship regulations for the Master’s programmes in Artificial Intelligence
and Data Science for Decision Making, approved by the Board of Examiners.
22
Article	1 Applicability	of	the	rules	and	regulations
These rules and regulations apply to the Internship for the Master’s programmes in
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science for Decision Making as further defined in the
Education and Examination Regulations, hereinafter referred to as EER.
Article	2 Objective
In the second year of the Master’s programmes, students may do an internship as part
of their orientation towards the professional field of decision making, artificial
intelligence and data science research. This internship can take the form of an
individual professional internship within a company, or as an individual research
internship at DKE, at another department at the UM or at another research university
(or in special cases at a research institute).
Article	3 Approval	of	internship
A student may present a proposal for an internship to the Board of Examiners for
approval after she/he has consent from the intended internship examiner.
Article	4 Internship	examiner:	appointment
The Board of Examiners will appoint an internship examiner. The internship examiner
must be a member of the academic staff of the programme and DKE and must have
obtained a PhD degree. In case of an internship outside DKE, the internship examiner
is not allowed to be employed at the internship organization. The examiner takes the
role of internship adviser.
Article	5 Internship	plan
Before the student starts the internship, the student has to set up a written internship
plan in consultation with the internship examiner and the internship organization.
The most recent form provided by the board of examiners is mandatory. The
internship plan needs approval of the Board of Examiners before the internship starts.
Article	6 Daily	supervisor
The daily supervisor at the internship organisation cannot be a student of DKE or a
family member. If the daily supervisor is an alumnus of DKE, s/he must have
graduated more than two years ago. Supervision cannot be done by a third party.
Article	7 Internship	examiner:	tasks
23
The tasks of the internship examiner include the following:
• approving the internship plan;
• advising the student during the internship about internship activities and
products;
• maintaining contact with the internship organisation;
• composing an ad hoc assessment committee;
• grading the internship based on consensus in the assessment committee;
• completing and signing an assessment form, providing specific feedback on
positive and negative points.
Article	8 Assessment
Assessment of the internship is done in accordance with the internship plan, by an ad
hoc committee, which consists of at least two members of the academic staff of the
programme holding a PhD degree, and which includes the internship examiner as well
as the daily adviser from the internship organisation. Grading is performed by the
examiner on the basis of consensus reached within the ad hoc assessment committee
(See Article 19 of the Rules and Regulations). The assessment form is handed in by
the examiner to the education office within 5 working days after grading.
Article	9 Internship	report
The internship report must include a list of the work activities and experience during
the internship and an in-depth review of specific problems related to the programme
that were dealt with during the internship. The student is responsible for handing in
the internship report and products included in the internship plan to the internship
examiner within 30 days of the end of the internship. The internship report may only
be made public with permission from the internship organisation.
24
Thesis	regulations
Thesis regulations for the Master’s programmes in Artificial Intelligence and
Data Science for Decision Making, approved by the Board of Examiners.
25
Article	1 Applicability	of	the	rules	and	regulations
These rules and regulations apply to the Master’s thesis for the master’s programmes
in Artificial Intelligence and Data Science for Decision Making as further defined in
the Education and Examination Regulations, hereinafter referred to as EER. The
Board of Examiners can set down further specification in master’s thesis regulations.
Article	2 Thesis	examiner:	appointment
The Board of Examiners shall appoint two thesis examiners for every student, in
consultation with the student and the proposed thesis examiner(s). One of the thesis
examiners takes the role of thesis supervisor. The thesis examiners must be a member
of the academic staff of the programme and DKE and must hold a PhD degree.
Article	3 Thesis	in	the	form	of	an	internship
The thesis can take the form of an internship, but with clearly defined research
questions. Furthermore, if the student previously did an internship as an elective, the
thesis must be clearly separated and distinct from the internship.
Article	4 Thesis	plan
Before the student starts his/her thesis, the student has to set up a written thesis plan in
consultation with and consent from the thesis examiners. The use of the most recent
form provided by the board of examiners is mandatory. The thesis plan needs
approval of the Board of Examiners before the thesis work can start. If there is a
confidentiality agreement, the Board of Examiners must confirm that this will not
interfere with the assessment.
Article	5 Thesis	examiner:	tasks
The thesis examiners are responsible for presenting the thesis plan to the Board of
Examiners; establishing that the required academic level is obtained; composing an ad
hoc assessment committee as described in Article 7, and completing the assessment
form. The examiners are also responsible for conducting a plagiarism check on the
final version of the thesis.
Article	6 Thesis	supervisor:	tasks
The thesis supervisor(s) advises the student while she/he is working on the thesis
about thesis activities and products and establishes that the required academic level is
obtained. If the thesis is conducted as an internship at an external organisation, the
thesis advisor needs to maintain contact with the daily supervisor at the internship
organisation. Supervision cannot be done by a third party.
26
Article	7 Thesis assessment
1. Assessment of the master’s thesis has to be done by an ad hoc committee, which
consists of at least the thesis examiners. If the thesis is conducted a as in an
external collaboration, the assessment committee also includes the daily
supervisor from the internship organisation.
2. Grading is done by the examiners on the basis of consensus reached in the ad hoc
assessment committee (See Article 19 of the Rules and Regulations). The
assessment form is handed in by the examiners to the education office within 5
working days after grading.
Article	8 Start	of	thesis	after	approval	of	thesis	plan
The student must wait until the Board of Examiners has approved the written thesis
plan as referred to in Article 3 before starting the thesis. A thesis plan has to be
approved by the thesis examiners before it is offered to the Board of Examiners. The
Board of Examiners assesses the plan on the formal requirements and on the basis of
the academic level of the research proposal and whether it is in line with the learning
goals of the programme (possibly seeking advice from staff members with relevant
expertise). Approval of the thesis plan is in principle valid for one year. If the thesis is
not finished within this period, an extension of 6 months is possible. To obtain this
extension the student must request approval from the Board of Examiners. The
request must be supported by the examiner and must state the reason(s) of the delay
and a motivation how the student will finish within 6 months. If this extension is not
granted, the student must submit a new thesis plan with a new topic and a new
supervisor.